# Ken189345

**Source:** ken189345.pdf
**Language:** en
**Country:** Kenya

---

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
1
CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
1
KENYA CLIMATE SMART AGRICULTURE
IMPLEMENTATION FRAMEWORK
2018-2027
Climate resilient, low carbon agriculture
REPUBLIC OF KENYA

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
i
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Irrigation
Kilimo House, Cathedral Road,
P. O. Box 30028 – 00100,
Nairobi, Kenya.
Tel. +254-20-718870
Website: www.kilimo.go.ke
© Government of the Republic of Kenya, 2018
REPUBLIC OF KENYA
Citation: Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Implementation Framework-2018-2027
Reproduction of this publication for educational or non-commercial purposes is authorized without prior written
permission provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of this publication for resale or other commercial
purposes is strictly prohibited without prior written permission of the copyright holder.
This document has been produced by the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation in collaboration with the Ministry of
Environment and Forestry with support from the DFID, the UNDP and the FAO through the Integrating Agriculture
in National Adaptation Plans project (NAP-Ag), NEPAD, COMESA and the CGIAR’s Research Program on Climate
Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS).
The views expressed in this document are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the FAO, the
UNDP or other contributing partners.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
ii
FOREWORD
According to the Kenya’s national development blue print, the Kenya Vison 2030, Kenya envisions being
a middle-income country with citizens enjoying high quality of life and a sustained annual economic
growth rate of at least 10% by year 2030. The agriculture sector is one of the key sectors to contribute to
the projected annual national economic growth.
The Government of Kenya is fully aware that the progress being made towards food security, poverty
reduction and sustainable development is at risk due to adverse impacts of climate change. Historical
records show that Kenya has experienced rising temperatures over the last 50 years coupled with intense
and extreme climate and weather events like droughts and fl oods. Future climatic predictions for Kenya
indicate possible temperature increase of 1ºC by 2020 and 2.3ºC by 2050.
These changes unless effectively mitigated, will likely result to erosion of the productive assets and the
weakening of coping strategies and resilience of rain-fed farming systems, especially in the arid and
semi-arid lands. This will lead to more climate related vulnerabilities thereby predisposing farming
communities to food insecurity and more poverty. In response to this scenario, the Government has been
exploring innovative and transformative measures to assist stakeholders across the agricultural value
chains to manage the effects of current and projected change of climate patterns. Consequently, the
Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Implementation Framework, 2018-2027 (KCSAIF) has been developed
to provide guidance in mainstreaming Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA). The Framework envisions a
climate resilient and low carbon growth sustainable agriculture that ensures food security and contributes
to national development goals in line with Kenya Vision 2030.
Further, the Framework explores climate smart practices relating to sustainable intensifi cation of crop, agro-
forestry, livestock and fi sheries production; adaptation and mitigation practices in livestock production
systems; effi cient management of agricultural commodity value chains; opportunities to leverage climate
fi nance for CSA; knowledge sharing and effective learning; strengthening key institutions and systems
for CSA initiatives; and mainstreaming CSA elements into national policies and development planning
process.
I therefore, urge all the relevant stakeholders to play their respective roles in ensuring that the Kenya
CSA Implementation Framework is successfully implemented to shield the agricultural sector from the
negative impacts of climate change to ensure its growth and maintain its position as a pillar of Kenya’s
development.
Hon. Mwangi Kiunjuri, EGH, MGH
Cabinet Secretary,
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Irrigation

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
iii
PREFACE
The agriculture sector is a major contributor to Kenya’s economy in terms of food and nutrition
security, employment creation, supply of agro-based industry raw materials and foreign exchange
earnings. About 98% of Kenya’s agricultural activities are rain-fed and highly susceptible to
climate change and climate variability. The susceptibility of the agricultural sector to climate
change is likely to compromise attainment of the sector’s contribution to food and nutrition
security, national economy and the global Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
The Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Implementation Framework 2018-2027 (KCSAIF) has
been developed to provide a guide to various innovative and transformative initiatives and best
practices that will strive to address challenges brought about by climate change. It is envisioned
to ensure increased agricultural productivity and sustainably build resilience of the national
agricultural systems. It also aims at providing various options for implementation of the Kenya
Climate Smart Agriculture Strategy 2017-2026 (KCSAS).The summary actions outlined in the
framework provide broad guidelines from which the Counties and other stakeholders in the sector
are expected to develop appropriate activities towards building the resilience of the agricultural
systems and value chain actors in order to cope with effects of the current and projected climate
change patterns based on specifi c climate change vulnerabilities.
This KCSAIF was developed by a multi-disciplinary team of crop, livestock, fi sheries,
meteorology, forestry and environment experts with knowledge on Climate Smart Agriculture
(CSA) and well versed with climate change issues and its effects to the agricultural sector. A
draft document of the framework was presented to various stakeholders including National and
County Governments for consultations and their valuable inputs were incorporated in this CSA
implementation framework.

It is our sincere hope that by proper implementation of this framework by all the stakeholders in
the sector, Kenya’s agriculture will immensely and sustainably contributes towards a food and
nutrition secure country while at the same time enhancing conservation of the natural production
environment.
HARRY K. KIMTAI
State Department for Livestock
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and
Irrigation
DR. RICHARD L. LESIYAMPE, PhD ,CBS.
State Department for Crop Development
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and
Irrigation

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
iv
PROF. MICHENI J. NTIBA, PhD , DBA, CBS
State Department for Fisheries, and Aquaculture and
the Blue Economy
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and
Irrigation
SUSAN MOCHACHE, CBS
State Department for Environment and Forestry
Ministry of Environment and Forestry
PROF: HAMADI I. BOGA, PhD
State Department for Agriculltural Research
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and
Irrigation
PROF: H. K. SEGOR, CBS.
State Department for Irrigation
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and
Irrigation

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
v
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Implementation Framework 2018-2027 has been developed to
promote climate resilient and low carbon growth sustainable agriculture that ensures food security and
contributes to national development goals in line with Kenya Vision 2030. The support and goodwill
from the Cabinet Secretary Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Irrigation, Cabinet Secretary
Ministry of Environment and Forestry, State Departments for Crop Development, Livestock, Fisheries
and Aquaculture and the Blue Economy, Agriculture Research and Irrigation were pivotal towards this
accomplishment.
The preparation of the framework greatly benefi ted from insightful contributions from a wide range of
institutions and individuals whose efforts I would like to recognize. I appreciate the multi-disciplinary
team of experts drawn from state and non-state organizations who commenced the development of this
framework in 2015. The invaluable contributions provided by the County Governments, the Private
Sector, Civil Society, Researchers and Academia during the consultative stakeholder workshops is highly
appreciated.
I express my gratitude to the following development partners who initially partnered with the team of
experts in the development of the framework; the New Partnership for African Development (NEPAD),
the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), East African Community (EAC), the
CGIAR Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS) and the Department for
International Development (DFID) of the UK Government.

This document has been fi nalized, printed and launched thanks to the support of the International Climate
Initiative (IKI) of the German Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation, Building and
Nuclear Safety (BMUB) through the Integrating Agriculture in National Adaptation Plans (NAP-Ag)
programme coordinated by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). This support is immeasurably appreciated.
Finally, I am grateful to members of the task team comprised of Dr. Lucy Ng’ang’a, Robin Mbae, Zipora
Otieno, Veronica Ndetu, Benjamin Kibor, Davies Makilla, Rose Akombo, Vincent Ogwang and Michael
Okumu for their enthusiastic technical support culminating in the fi nalization of this document.
With this Framework we hope to work together to address climate change challenges in a manner that will
promote climate resilient sustainable agriculture in Kenya.
Dr. Andrew Tuimur, CBS
Chief Administrative Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Irrigation

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
vi
TABLE OF CONTENTS
FOREWORD___________________________________________________________________________________ii
PREFACE_____________________________________________________________________________________iii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT______________________________________________________________________________v
TABLE OF CONTENTS____________________________________________________________________________vi
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY_________________________________________________________________________viii
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS_________________________________________________________________x
GLOSSARY/DEFINITION OF TERMS___________________________________________________________________xii
CHAPTER ONE:
INTRODUCTION__________________________________________________________________________________2
1.1
Background Information__________________________________________________________2
1.1.1
Alignment with Relevant National Policies___________________________________________2
1.2
Methodology___________________________________________________________________2
CHAPTER TWO:
SITUATIONAL  ANALYSIS_____________________________________________________________________________5
2.1
Background____________________________________________________________________5
2.2
Agricultural Production___________________________________________________________6
2.2.1
Crop production_________________________________________________________________7
2.2.2
Livestock production_____________________________________________________________7
2.2.3
Fisheries and aquaculture production________________________________________________9
2.2.4
Forests and agroforestry_________________________________________________________10
2.2.5
Food consumption and nutrition___________________________________________________10
2.3
Policy Environment____________________________________________________________12
2.4
Agricultural Growth and Development______________________________________________14
2.4.1
Land degradation and declining soil health___________________________________________14
2.4.2
Agricultural finance and investments_______________________________________________14
2.4.3
Extension and agro-weather advisory services________________________________________15
2.4.3.1
Extension services______________________________________________________________15
2.4.3.2
Agro-weather advisory services___________________________________________________15
2.5
Context of Climate Smart Agriculture__________________________________________________16
CHAPTER THREE:
FRAMEWORK  DESCRIPTION________________________________________________________________________18
3.1
Introduction___________________________________________________________________18
3.2
Goal and Objectives of the Framework______________________________________________18
3.3
Framework Implementation Components____________________________________________18
3.3.1
Component 1: Institutional coordination_____________________________________________18
3.3.1.1
Sub-component 1.1: Inter-Ministerial and County Government Coordination________________19
3.3.1.2
Sub-component 1.2: Government partnerships with private sector and civil society
organizations__________________________________________________________________19
3.3.1.3
Sub-component 1.3: Programmatic Coordination with Development Partners_______________20
3.3.1.4
Sub-component 1.4: Research-Extension Liaison framework_____________________________20
3.3.1.5
Sub-component 1.5: CSA research funding___________________________________________21
3.3.1.6
Sub-component 1.6: Appropriate CSA policies, strategies and regulations__________________21
3.3.1.7
Sub-component 1.7: CSA data collection, information management and dissemination systems_22
3.3.1.8
Sub-component 1.8: Strengthening institutional capacities______________________________22
3.3.2
Component 2: Agricultural productivity and integration of value chain approach_____________22

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
vii
3.3.2.1
Sub-component 2.1: Access to and use of adaptive technologies_________________________23
3.3.2.2
Sub-Component 2.2: Increase area under efficient irrigation_____________________________24
3.3.2.3
Sub-Component 2.3: Value addition and products development__________________________25
3.3.2.4
Sub-component 2:4: Competitiveness and markets access for climate smart products_________25
3.3.2.5
Sub-component 2.5: Food and Feed storage and distribution____________________________26
3.3.3
Component 3: Building resilience and appropriate mitigation actions______________________27
3.3.3.1
Sub-component 3.1: Soil health and land degradation__________________________________27
3.3.3.2
Sub-component 3.2: Water and other natural resources_________________________________28
3.3.3.3
Sub-component 3.3: Insurance and other safety nets___________________________________28
3.3.3.4
Sub-component 3.4: Synergies in adaptation and mitigation______________________________29
3.3.4
Component 4: Communication systems on CSA extension and agro-weather issues___________30
3.3.4.1
Sub-component 4.1: CSA knowledge generation and dissemination_______________________30
3.3.4.2
Sub-component 4.2: Extension on climate information services and agro-weather advisories___31
CHAPTER FOUR:
COORDINATION AND IMPLEMENTATION MECHANISM_______________________________________________33
4.1
Coordination__________________________________________________________________33
4.1.1
Intergovernmental Forum on Agriculture (IGF)______________________________________33
4.1.2
The Joint Agriculture Sector Steering Committee (JASSCOM)___________________________33
4.1.3
Joint Agriculture Sector Technical Working Groups (JAS-TWGs)_______________________33
4.1.4
Climate Change Units (CCUs)_____________________________________________________34
4.2
Linkages and Partnerships with other Key Actors______________________________________34
4.3
Implementation of KCSAIF_____________________________________________________34
4.3.1
Monitoring, Evaluation and Reporting_____________________________________________35
4.3.2
Reporting_____________________________________________________________________35
4.3.3
Quality Assurance_____________________________________________________________36
4.3.4
Budget_______________________________________________________________________36
REFERENCES________________________________________________________________________________________37
ANNEXES____________________________________________________________________________________________38
Annex 1:
Kenya CSA Implementation Framework Result-Based Log Frame________________________39
Annex 2:
Ten year KCSAIF investment plan and budget (2018-2027)_____________________________59
Annex 3:
Team of Experts involved in development of the KCSAIF 2018-2027_______________________60
Annex 4:
List participants of the National Consultative Workshop held at the Laico Regency Hotel, Nairobi

on 28th May 2015____________________________________________________________61
Annex 5:
List of participants of the National Validation Workshop held at Silver Springs Hotel, Nairobi on

30th June, 2015_______________________________________________________________63
Annex 6:
Team of Experts that finalised  KCSAIF_____________________________________________64
Annex 7:
List of participants in County consultations________________________________________65

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
viii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Agriculture Sector is the backbone of Kenya’s economy, contributing 25% of National Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) directly and another 27% indirectly. Kenya’s agriculture is mainly rain-fed (98%) and
predominantly small-scale, especially in the medium to high-potential areas which covers less than 15%
of the country. The larger proportion of the country (83-89%), is arid and semi-arid with an annual average
rainfall of 400 mm. This, coupled with increased land degradation, inadequate access to land and support
services, limited credit and markets, inadequate incentives for investment in agriculture, weak producer
associations and institutional arrangements, has increased the vulnerability of the farming systems. This
has led to erosion of productive assets and weakening their resilience, hence predisposing poor households
to food insecurity and high poverty levels.
The agricultural sector productivity is directly influenced by emerging and projected climate change
patterns that include increased variability of seasonal rainfall and increased frequency and intensity of
extreme weather and climate events such as droughts and floods. These   have devastating impacts on
the national economy and the livelihoods of the people. Negative economic growth indices have been
associated with extreme weather events and unless climate change is not addressed, the economic costs of
its impacts are estimated to be 3% of GDP per annum by 2030 and 5% by 2050. Further, climate change
impacts are likely to increase the vulnerability of farming systems, thus weakening their coping strategies
and resilience.
Innovative measures are therefore needed to help farmers and consumers cope with the changes in emerging
and projected climatic patterns. This Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Implementation Framework 2018-
2027 (KCSAIF), hereinafter referred to as “the Framework”, has been developed to set guidelines for
implementing Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) approaches, strategies, practices and technologies in
Kenya. CSA is an approach that will simultaneously enhance gains in agricultural productivity, build
resilience to climatic and weather shocks as well as reduce emissions intensity from agriculture and food
systems by adapting to efficient practices. This would require collaborative actions amongst the various
actors along the value chain, including: National and County Governments, farmers, the private sector,
development partners, Non-Governmental Organizations, Civil Society Organizations and other value
chain actors.
The Framework has been developed to guide implementation of CSA at national and county government
levels and above all in the context of global obligations and local realities in consideration that Kenya is a
signatory to the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreements. It is realigned to the need for Kenya to realize
its development goals under Kenya Vision 2030, of which agriculture is a key driver. The Framework aims
at leveraging on global opportunities by providing clear structures through which farmers can directly
benefit from by tapping the available global climate financing instruments in collaborations with the sector
players.
The purpose of the Framework is to “promote climate resilient and low carbon growth sustainable
agriculture that ensures food security and contributes to national development goals in line with Kenya
Vision 2030’’. This will be realized through implementation of actions designed around four components,
viz:
1.	 Institutional coordination component that will strengthen national inter-ministerial collaboration,
enhance coordination between the national and county governments and provide an enabling policy
and institutional environment for the realization of the overall purpose of KCSAIF.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
ix
2.	 Agricultural productivity and integration of value chain approach component that will transform
Kenya’s agricultural sector into an innovative, commercially oriented, competitive and modern
industry by supporting establishment of efficient and effective value chains. This is meant to support
a shift in smallholder production strategies from subsistence to satisfying market demand through
use of improved technologies and enhanced linkages.
3.	 Building resilience and appropriate mitigation actions component which aims at building resilience
and associated mitigation co-benefits to address  issues related to   soil health and land degradation;
water and natural resources; insurance and other safety nets;  building of synergies in adaptation and
mitigation measures.
4.	 CSA knowledge, extension and agro-weather services component which will raise awareness
and strengthen mainstreaming of communication systems to transmit timely information on CSA
extension and agro-weather issues among value chain actors. This component will also support local
stakeholders to access and adopt methodologies as well as influence the local planning systems that
support CSA.
Two layers of interventions are anticipated in the Framework. The first layer is expected to address
climate smart issues in already planned and funded on-going projects/actions in sector ministries/county
governments and private sector initiatives that need climate smarting/monitoring/tracking/learning. The
second layer will involve development of new and/or additional actions in form of projects/programmes
which address gaps and guides investors/development partners and which may require fund raising. The
summary of action areas described will be a guide to achieve this.
The proposed investments under the Framework are aligned with MTP III investment priorities.
The total budget needed to implement the programme is estimated at KSh. 167.31 Billion. These
resources will be mobilized from diverse sources such as the National Government Funding, Bilateral and
Multilateral Development Partners, Climate Finance (CF), Adaptation Fund (AF), Green Climate Fund
(GCF), and from the Private Sector.
This Framework will be implemented within the Joint Consultation and Cooperation Mechanism for the
Agricultural Sector (JCCMAS) which is in line with Intergovernmental Relations Act 2012. This will
involve the three layers mechanism of operations, viz; (a) Intergovernmental Forum on Agriculture (IGF)
which is the highest level of JCCMAS. The IGF is rooted in Intergovernmental Relations Act, where it
empowers the Intergovernmental Relations Secretariat to establish sectoral working groups or committees;
(b) The Joint Agriculture Sector Steering Committee (JASSCOM) comprises high-level executives of the
two levels of governments.
The committee will provide regular direction for sector transformation initiatives agreed between the
two levels of government and prepares follow-up for IGF meetings; and (c) Joint Agriculture Sector-
Technical Working Group (JAS-TWG) which aims at providing a uniform platform for intergovernmental
technical consultation based on the principle of equitable representation at the two levels of government
to enhance the framework effectiveness. The KCSAIF monitoring and evaluation plan will be agreed upon
by the different stakeholders to ensure delivery and ownership. It will be based on Logical Framework
Approach (LFA) with emphasis on results. Review of progress in the implementation of CSA actions will
be organized annually or biennially through forums at national and county government levels. Public
participation will be encouraged through inclusion of all stakeholders in these review forums.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
x
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AEZ
Agro Ecological Zone
AF
Adaptation Fund
AgGDP
Agriculture Gross Domestic Product
ASALs
Arid and Semi-Arid Lands
ASDS
Agricultural Sector Development Strategy
ASDSP
Agricultural Sector Development Support Programme
BAU
Business as Usual
CA
Conservation Agriculture
CAADP
Comprehensive African Agriculture Development Programme
CBOs
Community Based Organizations
CCAFS
Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security
CCUs
Climate Change Units
CGIAR
Consultative Group of International Agricultural Research
CF
Climate Finance
COMESA
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
CS
Cabinet Secretary
CSA
Climate Smart Agriculture
CSOs
Civil Society Organizations
DFID
Department for International Development
EAC
East African Community
ERS
Economic Recovery Strategy for Wealth and Employment Creation
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FBOs
Faith-Based Organizations
GAPs
Good Agricultural Practices
GCF
Green Climate Fund
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GHG
Greenhouse Gas
GIZ
Deutsche Gesellschaftfür Internationale Zusammenarbeit
GoK
Government of Kenya
HFCs
Hydrofluorocarbons
ICT
Information and Communications Technology
IGF
Intergovernmental Forum on Agriculture
IKI
International Climate Initiative
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IVR
Interactive Voice Response
IWRM
Integrated Water Resources Management
JAS-IGS
Joint Agriculture Sector-Intergovernmental Secretariat
JAS-TWGs
Joint Agriculture Sector-Technical Working Groups
JASSCOM
Joint Agriculture Sector Steering Committee
JCCMAS
Joint Consultation and Cooperation Mechanism for the Agricultural Sector
KCSAIF
Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Implementation Framework
KCSAS
Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Strategy
KFS
Kenya Forest Service

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
xi
KMD
Kenya Meteorological Department
LFA
Logical Framework Approach
M&E
Monitoring and Evaluation
MOA&I
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Irrigation
MOALF
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Irrigation
MDAs
Ministries, Departments and Agencies
ME&NR
Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources
MRV
Monitoring, Reporting and Verification
MT
Metric Tons
MTIP
Medium Term Investment Plan
MTP
Medium Term Plan
NASEP
National Agricultural Sector Extension Policy
NAEP
National Agricultural Extension Policy
NALEP
National Agricultural and Livestock Extension Program
NAP
National Adaptation Plan
NARS
National Agricultural Research System
NCA
National Carbon Accounting
NCCAP
National Climate Change Action Plan
NCCRS
National Climate Change Response Strategy
NCCSAP
National Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan
NDCs
Nationally Determined Contributions
NEMA
National Environment Management Authority
NEPAD
New Partnership for African Development
NGOs
Non-Governmental Organizations
NIB
National Irrigation Board
NIMES
National Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Systems
NRM
Natural Resources Management
PFCs
Perfluorocarbons
PPP
Public Private Partnership
SAPs
Structural Adjustment Programs
SDA
State Department for Agriculture
SDF
State Department for Fisheries
SDGs
Sustainable Development Goals
SDL
State Department for Livestock
SEI
Stockholm Environment Institute
SMS
Short Messaging Service
SPS
Sanitary and Phyto-Sanitary Standards
SRA
Strategy for Revitalizing Agriculture
UK
United Kingdom
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme
UNFCCC
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
WB
World Bank
WMO
World Meteorological Organization
WY&VG
Women, Youth and Venerable Groups

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
xii
GLOSSARY/DEFINITION OF TERMS
Adaptation: Adjustment in agro-ecosystems in response to actual or expected climatic stimuli or their
effects, which moderates harm or exploits beneficial opportunities.
Agro-ecosystem: The organisms and environment of an agricultural area considered as an ecosystem.
Agricultural emissions: Agriculture related atmospheric gases responsible for causing global warming
and climate change released from converting land into cultivations, fertilizers application and/or livestock
production.
Agricultural productivity: A measure of the amount of agricultural output produced for a given amount
of agricultural inputs e.g. the value of all farm outputs divided by the value of all farm inputs. The process
involves increased integration of agriculture with other sectors of the economy.
Agricultural transformation: The process by which individual farms shift from subsistence-oriented
production towards more advanced production oriented towards the market or other systems of exchange.
Arid and Semi-Arid Lands: Areas characterized by inadequate precipitation, which constrains their two
major interlinked services of primary production and nutrient cycling.
Biodiversity: The total diversity of all organisms and ecosystems at various spatial scales (from genes to
entire biomass).
Capacity building: In the context of climate smart agriculture, it is the process of developing relevant
technical skills and institutional capability to enable effective addressing of the causes and effects of
climate change for the agriculture sector.
Carbon sequestration: The process of removing carbon from the atmosphere and depositing it in a
reservoir such as the soil or trees.
CSOs: In this framework CSOs include Non-Governmental Organization, (NGOs), Community Based
Organization (CBOs), Faith-based Organizations (FBOs), and other Non-State Actors.
Climate change: Climate change refers to a change in the state of the climate that can be identified
(e.g. by using statistical tests) by changes in the mean and/or the variability of its properties, and that
persists for an extended period, typically decades or longer. Climate change may be due to natural internal
processes or external forcing, or to persistent anthropogenic changes in the composition of the atmosphere
or in land use.
Climate resilient: Represents efforts undertaken to integrate the challenges posed by climate change and
its impacts on agricultural systems.
Climate Smart Agriculture: Agriculture that sustainably increases productivity, resilience (adaptation),
reduces/removes greenhouse gases (mitigation), and enhances the achievement of national food security
and development goals.
Co-benefits: Multiple benefits in different fields resulting from one policy, strategy, or action plan.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE xiii
Conservation Agriculture (CA): An approach to manage agro-ecosystems for improved and sustained
productivity, increased profits and food security while preserving and enhancing the resource base and the
environment. It is characterized by three linked principles namely, continuous minimum mechanical soil
disturbance; permanent organic soil cover; and diversification of crop species grown in sequences and/or
associations.
Degradation: Refers to any change or disturbance in the environment, land or soil that is perceived to be
deleterious or undesirable.
Deforestation: The conversion of forest to another land use or the long-term reduction of tree canopy
cover below the 10% threshold.
Drought: The phenomenon that exists when precipitation is significantly below normal recorded levels,
causing serious hydrological imbalances that often adversely affect land resources and production systems.
Ecosystem services: Ecological processes or functions that have monetary or non-monetary value to
individuals or society at large e.g. Productivity or biodiversity maintenance; provisioning services such
as food, fibre, or fish; regulating services such as climate regulation or carbon sequestration; and cultural
services such as tourism or spiritual and aesthetic values.
Ecosystem: The interactive system formed from all living organisms and their abiotic (physical and
chemical) environment within a given area.
Enteric fermentation: Enteric fermentation is a natural part of the digestive process for many ruminant
animals where anaerobic microbes called methanogens, decompose and ferment food present in the
digestive tract producing compounds that are then absorbed by the host animal. A resulting by-product of
this process is methane.
Erosion: The process of removal and transport of soil and rock by weathering, mass wasting, and the
action of streams, glaciers, waves, winds and underground water.
Food and nutrition security: This exists when all people, at all times have physical, social and economic
access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food that meets their dietary needs and food preferences for an
active and healthy life.
Greenhouse gases: The atmospheric gases responsible for causing global warming and climate change.
The major GHGs are carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O). Less prevalent but
very powerful greenhouse gases are hydro-fluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and Sulphur
hexafluoride (SF6).
Index-based insurance: An insurance product in which the insured in a specified geographical region,
receive indemnity payments based on independently observable outcomes/parameters such as temperature,
rainfall, vegetation quantity, crop yields among others which are used to determine premiums and payouts.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC): Established in 1988 by the World Meteorological
Organization (WMO) and the UN Environment Programme (UNEP), the IPCC surveys world-wide
scientific and technical literature and publishes assessment reports that are widely recognized as the most
credible existing sources of information on climate change. The IPCC also works on methodologies
and responds to specific requests from the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) subsidiary bodies.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
xiv
Mitigation: In the context of climate change, human intervention to reduce the sources or enhance the
sinks of greenhouse gases e.g. using fossil fuels more efficiently or electricity generation, switching to
solar energy or wind power from fossil fuels for industrial processes and expanding forests and other
“sinks” to remove greater amounts of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.
Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions: A set of government prioritized actions aimed at reducing
or limiting greenhouse gas emissions.
Payment for Ecosystem Services: An economic instrument designed to provide positive incentives to
users of agricultural land and those involved in coastal or marine management. These incentives are
expected to result in continued or improved provision of ecosystem services, which in turn, will benefit
society as a whole.
Public Private Partnerships: Public Private Partnerships (PPP) are associations between government
and the private sector through which private financing is utilized to perform a public function, at a profit
to the private sector.
Resilience: The ability of a system and its component parts to anticipate, absorb, accommodate, or recover
from the effects of a hazardous event in a timely and efficient manner.
Vulnerability: The degree to which a system is susceptible to or unable to cope with adverse effects of
climate change, including climate variability and extremes. Vulnerability is a function of the character,
magnitude, and rate of climate variation to which a system is exposed, its sensitivity, and its adaptive
capacity.
Watershed: A topographically delineated area that is drained by a stream system, i.e. the total land area
that drains to some point on a stream or river. The watershed is a hydrologic unit that has been described
and used as a physical-biological unit and a socio-economic-political unit for planning and managing of
natural resources.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
1
CHAPTER ONE:
KALRO- NARL Laboratories

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
2
INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background Information
The agriculture sector, comprising of crops, livestock, fisheries, agro-forestry and associated services
plays a major role in Kenya’s economy. The sector is the largest contributor to Kenya’s Gross Domestic
Product (GDP), directly contributing about 25% and another 27% indirectly via linkages to agro-based
industries and the service sector, giving an overall 52% contribution to GDP (UNEP, 2015).
The crops, livestock and fisheries sub-sectors contribute 77.6%, 19.6% and 2.0% of the Agricultural GDP
(AgGDP) respectively, and forestry contributing about 0.8%. The agriculture sector is mainly dominated
by small-holder farmers with most production being carried out on farms averaging 0.2–3 ha. This
small-scale production accounts for over 75% of the total agricultural output and over 70% of marketed
agricultural produce.
The agricultural sector contributes significantly to Kenya’s food security, income generation, employment
creation and poverty reduction. The sector contributes 60% of the country’s income, accounts for over
65% of total exports, provides 60% of total employment, 18% of which is formal (UNEP, 2015).
The agriculture sector is one of the priorities in the economic pillar of Kenya Vision 2030 (GoK, 2007),
which aims at achieving an innovative, commercially oriented, modern agricultural sector through
institutional reforms, increased productivity, land use transformation, increased access to markets and
development of arid and semi-¬arid lands (ASALs). To respond to the impacts of climate change in
agriculture, the sector developed the Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Strategy (KCSAS) 2017-2026
(GoK, 2017a). The strategy sets out a detailed plan on how to “adapt to climate change, build resilience of
agricultural systems while minimizing emissions for enhanced food and nutritional security and improved
livelihoods”. This Framework therefore, outlines the envisaged actions towards the implementation of the
KCSAS 2017-2026.
1.1.1 Alignment with Relevant National Policies
The Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Implementation Framework (KCSAIF) is aligned to the Constitution
of Kenya 2010 (GoK, 2010a), Kenya Vision 2030 (GoK, 2007), Agricultural Sector Development
Strategy 2010-2020 (GoK, 2010b), Climate Change Policy Framework 2015, National Climate Change
Response Strategy (NCCRS) (GoK, 2010c), National Climate Change Action Plan 2013-2017 (NCCAP)
(GoK, 2013a), Kenya National Adaptation Plan 2015-2030 (GoK, 2016a) and the Kenya Climate Smart
Agriculture Strategy 2017-2026 (GoK, 2017a).
The KCSAIF has been prepared to contribute to Kenya’s efforts to adapt and build resilience in agriculture
and meet the commitments given under the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) submitted to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).
1.2 Methodology
The preparation of KCSAIF was through concerted efforts by the Government of Kenya to mainstream
climate change considerations into policies, strategies, programmes and plans. It was developed through
a consultative approach of a multi-stakeholder engagement led by the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock,
Fisheries and Irrigation and the Ministry of Environment and Forestry.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
3
The experts were drawn from relevant Ministries, Departments and Agencies, County Governments, Civil
Society Organizations (CSOs), Community Based Organizations (CBOs), Private Sector, Researchers and
Academia.
The process involved technical working sessions that were informed by review of the sector’s programmes,
strategies and plans as well as analysis of options for agricultural sector growth in a changing climate.
A national consultative workshops and a validation workshop were conducted with a wide range of
stakeholders engaged including public and private sector, local and international NGOs, academia, farmer
organizations, development partners, National and County government representatives among others.
Further consultative sessions were held in six regional circuits with relevant County government’s
representatives to ensure bottom up approach in development of priority actions for implementation in the
framework.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
4
CHAPTER TWO:

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
5
SITUATIONAL ANALYSIS
2.1 Background
The agricultural sector in Kenya is highly vulnerable to extreme weather events, climatic shocks, climatic
changes and variability. Climate change is creating further stresses on food and water supply while
further degrading the environment. It is estimated that between 2008 and 2011, drought which is a major
climatic hazard in Kenya became more and more frequent and has caused losses of KSh. 699.3 billion
(72.2% of total losses) in the livestock sector while the agKSh. 121.1 billion (12.5% of total losses).
With the deteriorating climatic conditions primarily due to climate change, the annual growth rate of
agricultural “value added” products has been on the decline (GoK, 2015). Extended periods of drought
have negatively impacted on livelihood opportunities and community resilience in these areas leading to
undesirable coping strategies that damage the environment and impair household nutritional status, further
undermining long-term food security
According to the Fifth Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Assessment Report of
September 2013, the Earth’s temperature has increased by about 0.89°C in the period 1901 to 2012.
The Farm Management Handbook of Kenya (Jaetzold et al., 2009) and the Atlas of Kenya’s Changing
Environment (UNEP, 2009) indicates that Kenya’s average annual temperatures increased by 1°C between
1960 and 2003. In western Kenya, temperatures rose by 0.5°C between 1981 and 2004 while in the drier
parts of the country the temperatures went up by 1.5°C over the same period. These changes have led to a
shift of the upper altitudinal limits of Agro-Ecological Zone (AEZ) boundaries. Also, incremental changes
in temperature and rainfall patterns are expected to contribute to biodiversity loss and emergence of new
pests and diseases.
Changes in the distribution, onset and cessation of rainfall seasons makes it increasingly difficult to plan
agricultural operations resulting in lower crop yields in major production zones thus aggravating the food
and nutrition insecurity. Frequent water shortages leads to decrease in the reliable cropping days, higher
incidence of crop failure, and livestock and fish deaths.
According to the Kenya Second National Communications, the agriculture sector is the largest contributor
of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (NEMA, 2015). The largest share of emissions (CH4) originates from
enteric fermentation associated with ruminant livestock,   agricultural soils (N2O) and manure management.
Emissions from agriculture are expected to rise due to increased food demand for the growing population
leading to increased encroachment of forests through agricultural expansion. However, policy direction
indicates that the focus of emissions management will not be on absolute emissions but on production
efficiency, leading to increased output per unit of emission. This can make the agriculture sector be part of
the solution to emission reduction if appropriate measures are taken.
Kenya is classified as a water-scarce country whose natural endowment of freshwater is limited by an
annual renewable freshwater supply of only 647 m3 per capita falling below the World Bank categorization
of 1000 m3 per capita for a water scarce country (WB, 2000). With the increase in the frequency of extreme
weather events, water scarcity will increase and the country will need to invest more on water resources
management and conservation. Therefore, the country needs to be innovative with water conservation and
harvesting technologies that assure safe water access to the Kenyan population for industrial, agricultural
and domestic use.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
6
2.2 Agricultural Production
Kenya’s agriculture system has evolved through socio-political dynamics and reforms some of which
have had negative impacts. The introduction of Structural Adjustment Programs (SAPs) in the 1980s
which liberalized the input and output markets is one such example. The SAPs opened the markets to
forces of demand and supply and therefore affecting prices of most agriculture commodities and quality
of agricultural inputs and services.
In 2003, the Government of Kenya developed the Economic Recovery Strategy for Wealth and Employment
Creation 2003-2007 (ERS) (GoK, 2003) which was successfully implemented. In 2004 the Strategy for
Revitalizing Agriculture 2004-2014 (SRA) (GoK, 2004), was developed and implemented as the sector
vision to respond to the decline witnessed in the agriculture sector. During the implementation of the ERS,
the overall economy recovered from a low growth of 0.5 % in 2002 to 7 % in 2007. Over the same period,
the agriculture sector grew at an average rate of 3.9 % with a high growth rate of 7 % in 2005.
During the first Medium Term Plan (MTP) 2008-2012 (GoK 2008), the sector recorded an average annual
growth rate of 4.3 % against a target of 7 %. This was mainly due to adverse weather conditions in some
years and increased costs of major inputs such as seeds, fertilizer and fuel. The value of agricultural output
increased by KSh. 70,550 million per annum between 2008 and 2011 against a target of KSh. 80,000
million per year as set out in Kenya Vision 2030 and ASDS. The growth of the national economy is highly
correlated to growth and development in agriculture, indicating the sector’s importance for the stimulation
of overall economic growth (Figure 1).
Figure 1: Agricultural GDP growth rate vs national GDP growth rate 1968-2012
Source: D’Alessandro (2015)
Figure 2 shows that overtime, negative growth indices have been associated with extreme weather events,
whose increasing frequency and magnitude have resulted to decline in agricultural “value-added” products
(GoK, 2015). According to the Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI), if climate change in Kenya is not
addressed effectively, the economic costs of its impacts are estimated to be 3% of GDP per year by 2030
and possibly 5% by 2050 (SEI, 2009).

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
7
2.2.1	 Crop production
The three main categories of crops in Kenya include food, industrial and horticultural crops. Food crops
include; cereals (maize, wheat, sorghum, rice, millet,); pulses (beans, pigeon peas, cowpeas, chickpea,
green grams); and roots and tubers (sweet potato, Irish potato, cassava, arrow root and yam) (GoK,
2010b). The major industrial crops are tea, coffee, pyrethrum, cotton and sugarcane among others. The
horticultural crops includes cut flowers, vegetables (tomatoes, cabbage, kales, carrots), fruits (bananas,
mangoes, nuts, herbs and spices).
The relative importance of these different agricultural enterprises varies and their spatial and temporal
distribution is also varied. Historical data from 1963 to 2012 (GoK, 2016b) shows that average maize
and beans acreage has been increasing but yields have stabilized between 1.5 and 2 tons/ha since 1980’s.
As regards the major industrial crops (tea, coffee, and sugar), the production level has been fairly stable
as a result of increased area, but the yields per hectare have been on the decline. This has largely been
attributed to changes in climate.
The area under horticultural crops and the value of total production has been on an upward trend with
value of horticultural exports growing by an average of 16% rising from KSh. 26.6 Billion in 2002 to
KSh. 43.3 Billion in 2006 and to KSh. 65.2 Billion in 2007 (GoK, 2010b). However, the yields of most
vegetables have been stagnant, except the indigenous vegetables. Only 10% of Kenya’s fresh agricultural
produce finds its way into regional and other global markets with most of it being consumed locally.
However due to the perishable nature of these products, producers and marketers incur post-harvest losses
ranging between 30-75%. This is basically due to poor transport networks, low value addition, insufficient
storage and preservation facilities among other factors.
2.2.2	 Livestock production
The livestock sub-sector employs about 50% of the agricultural labour force and is the main agricultural
enterprise for over 10 million Kenyans living in the arid and semi-arid lands (ASALs). The ASALs which
are dominantly inhabited by pastoralists, hosts about 70% of the national livestock herd with an estimated
value of KSh. 70 Billion accounting approximately 40% of the Agricultural GDP. According to the 2009
Figure 2: Agricultural growth index and major extreme events in Kenya 1980-2012
Source: GoK (2015)

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
8
census, the country’s livestock population was 17.5 million cattle, 27.7 million goats, 17 million sheep, 3
million camels, 31.8 million poultry, and 1.8 million donkeys while in 2016 the cattle were 20.5 million,
goats 26.6 million, sheep 18.9 million, camels 3.2 million, poultry 36.6 million and donkeys 2 million
(GoK, 2001).
The livestock population growth in the country is driven by the rapidly increasing demand for livestock
products due to increased population growth, urbanization and increasing incomes. The overall livestock
population trends (largely based on estimates) across all species has been on the increase between 1963
and 2016 (Figure 3). The evident fl uctuations in livestock population is closely related to severe drought
events meaning that performance of the livestock sub-sector is highly affected and sensitive to rainfall.
Due to climate change effect on livestock, emerging livestock such as donkeys, crocodiles, ostrich, quails
and guinea fowls are being promoted to bridge animal product defi cit which can effectively contribute
towards meeting animal protein requirements besides the common livestock value chains. Other signifi cant
resilient livestock enterprises are beekeeping and camel production. It is projected that production of
livestock products is bound to increase with increasing human population, urbanization and incomes
(Figure 4).

Figure 3: Livestock population trends from 1963 to 2016
Source: Livestock Sector Report (2016)

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
9
Figure 5: National fi sh production between 2005 and 2016
Source: GoK (2016c)
The magnitude of livestock production systems in Kenya, ranging from extensive (nomadic) pastoralism,
agro-pastoralism (semi-nomadic), mixed crop/livestock farming systems are often changing due to climate
change and weather variability.
2.2.3 Fisheries and aquaculture production
The fi sheries sub-sector plays an important role in the national economy especially in contributing to
food and nutrition security, poverty reduction and employment creation. The sub-sector which contributes
about 0.5 % of the country’s National GDP is categorized into capture and farmed (aquaculture) fi sheries.
The capture fi sheries is mainly composed of freshwater (lakes, rivers and dams) and marine (Ocean). The
fresh water species of most economic signifi cance includes the Nile perch and tilapia, the marine water
species includes the tuna, billfi sh, shrimp and saline/marine water-crabs, milk fi sh, oysters, sea weeds
among other species.
Figure 4: Production of livestock meat, milk and eggs in Kenya
Source: Livestock Sector Report (2016)

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
10
The farmed fisheries resources include the trout fish in cold water high altitude areas and tilapia, catfish,
common carp for warmer water low altitude areas. Figure 5 shows the quantities and monetary value of
fish produced in Kenya between 2005 and 2016.
Over the years, climate change has resulted in negative impacts on fish production due to warming of waters
bodies, degradation of suitable breeding sites and receding of water levels of major freshwater bodies. The
reduced water availability resulting from frequent droughts also limits aquaculture development.
2.2.4	 Forests and agroforestry
Statistics shows that forests contributed about 1.4% to Kenya’s GDP in 2014 without including the
forestry’s contribution to household wood energy, non-timber products and ecosystem services. However,
the forests are threatened by agricultural expansion and unsustainable use of forest resources which have
led to increased pressure on forest resources. An analysis of change in forest cover over between 1990 and
2015 revealed an increase in afforestation and agroforestry activities (KFS, 2013). The data shows that
land under forest has decreased by 311,000 ha equivalent to 25% loss of forest cover. However, there was
a slight increase in forest cover from 6.01% in 2000 to 7.46% in 2015. This is equivalent to an average
annual increase of 0.1% (Table 1).
Table 1: Analysis of forest cover change between 1990 and 2015
Year
Forest area
(‘000 ha)
Percent
forest cover
Annual
change (‘000 ha)
Annual change (%)
1990
4,724
7.98
2000
3,557
6.01
–1,167
–24.7
2005
4,047
6.84
490
13.8
2010
4,136
6.99
89,4
2.2
2015 (projected)
4,413
7.46
276
66.7
Source: KFS (2013)
Deforestation and forest degradation is particularly prominent in arid and semi-arid areas where the
increasing agricultural activities are claiming virgin forested landscapes. A major challenge in the country
is how to harmonize national development and agricultural policies that seek to promote agricultural
development while avoiding or mitigating against deforestation and forest degradation and associated
greenhouse gas emissions.
Agricultural intensification, farm forestry and agroforestry have been identified as viable and attractive
options to reconcile agricultural development and forest protection. The basic principle is that increased
yields per area, increased farm holding products and incomes, access to forest products within the farm
holding and on-farm carbon sequestration will reduce the need for more land encroachment into forested
areas. Farm forestry is also associated with additional benefits including easy access to forest products,
restoration of degraded landscapes, carbon sequestration and strengthening community resilience to
climate change. The development of Farm Forestry Rules (GoK, 2009) and the Kenya Climate Smart
Agriculture Strategy 2017-26 (GoK, 2017a) provide the appropriate entry points for incentivizing tree-
based interventions in agricultural landscapes.
2.2.5	 Food consumption and nutrition
Food security exists when people at all times have physical and economic access, sufficient, safe and
nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and preferences. In Kenya, crops, livestock and fisheries
constitute the people’s basket of food security assets. Most Kenyans live on diets based on staple crops

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 11
(mainly maize) that lack in nutrition diversity. Lack of access and availability of adequate and diversified
diets results into various forms of nutrition related challenges. In view of this, efforts need to be enhanced
to promote foods rich in micronutrients and includes fruits, vegetables, and livestock and fish products.
Maize has been the major staple crop for majority of Kenyans. However, its production has been fluctuating
over the years, which threatens household food security and income sources (GoK, 2015). The demand of
maize in the country has been on the increase exceeding the domestic production. The shortfall in national
production is met by maize imports (Figure 6).
Figure 6: Kenya maize balance sheet between 2008 and 2014
Source: GoK (2015)
It is projected that the gap between maize production and consumption in Kenya will widen as we approach
year 2050 (Figure 7).
Figure 7: Projected maize production and consumption in Kenya by year 2050
Source: GoK (2015)

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
12
Crops such as wheat, rice, beans, millet, cowpeas, green grams, pigeon peas, sweet potatoes, cassava,
cocoyam and yams are also mainly produced for domestic consumption. However, climate change
impacts are likely to lead to food deficit and increased food prices. This will reduce affordability of nearly
all agricultural commodities, including basic staples and livestock products. Besides, the country’s per
capita fish consumption increased from 3.2 Kg/person/ year in 2013 to 4.5 Kg/person/year in 2016 (GoK,
2016b).
2.3	 Policy Environment
Policy reforms are cited as one of the drivers of productivity gains experienced in the agricultural sector.
The Government of Kenya has over the years developed policies and strategies to enhance agricultural
growth, natural resource management and climate change interventions. These policy reforms substantially
improve the economic environment for agriculture through improvements in pricing, trade, exchange
rates, institutions and markets. Table 2 summarizes the key policy documents that the government has
developed/ratified which are relevant to CSA implementation.
Table 2: Main policies relevant to CSA implementation in Kenya
Name of Policy/Legal
document
Key thematic areas relevant to CSA implementation
Constitution of Kenya
2010
The constitution provides for the right to food security, clean and healthy
environment, while emphasizing sustainable and productive management of land
resources (e.g. maintenance of 10% tree cover of the country’s land cover).
Kenya Vision 2030
The country’s development blueprint for 2008-2030 identifies agriculture as a key
sector to boost economic growth. It aims to transform smallholder agriculture from
low-productivity subsistence activities to an innovative, competitive agricultural
sector. The vision is operationalized in a series of five-year Medium-Term
Plans (MTPs), where MTP-III (2018-2022) outlines climate smart agriculture
interventions.
Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries
Agricultural Sector
Development Strategy
2010-2020
Provides a framework for transforming agriculture into an innovative, commercially
and modern viable sector. Kenya’s CAADP commits the government to
implementing the common vision of the sector, as described in the Agricultural
Sector Development Strategy (ASDS) to address the agricultural development
agenda in the country.
Kenya Climate Smart
Agriculture Strategy
2017-2026
Recognizes climate change as an emerging issue for food and nutrition security
and advocates for adaptation interventions that enhance farming communities’
resilience to climate change induced effects. It also recognizes the role of mitigation
in addressing climate change.
Environment and Climate Change
National Climate Change
Response Strategy (2010
The strategy highlights agricultural interventions such as restoration of degraded
ecosystems, provision of downscaled weather information, water harvesting
for irrigation, protection of natural resource base (soil and water conservation
techniques), agricultural waste management, agroforestry, research and
dissemination of improved (drought tolerant, salt-tolerant, pest and disease resistant)
crops, livestock and fisheries.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 13
Name of Policy/Legal
document
Key thematic areas relevant to CSA implementation
National Climate Change
Action Plan 2013-2017
The NCCAP identifies climate smart practices that reduce climate vulnerability
while reducing emissions and improving agricultural production potential. The
practices include; agro-forestry and conservation tillage and management of
agricultural wastes, improved management of grazing systems, biogas, livestock
diversification, improved breeding of animals, drought tolerant crops, water
harvesting, integrated soil fertility management, insurance schemes, price
stabilization schemes for livestock, strategic food reserves, and mainstreaming
climate change into agricultural extension services.
National Climate Change
Framework Policy (2017)
The policy includes statements that enhance climate resilience and adaptive
capacity, promote low-carbon growth, and mainstream climate change into planning
processes. It notes the potential for the agriculture sector to reduce GHG emissions,
enhance resilience and recommends investment to create green jobs.
Climate Change Act
(2016)
The Act outlines climate resilience and adaptive capacity to promote low carbon
growth, and to mainstream climate change into planning processes while developing
incentives to promote climate resilient actions.
National Adaptation Plan
(NAP)
The Plan summaries short, medium and long-term actions that enhance resilience in
the agriculture, livestock and fisheries value chains.
Nationally Determined
Contributions (NDCs)
The NDCs provide a framework in which the Kenya Government commits to reduce
GHG emissions by 30% by 2030, compared to business as usual scenario (BAU), in
addition to building resilience. The agriculture sector will enhance the resilience and
contribute to reduction of GHG emissions by promoting climate smart agriculture.
Sessional Paper No. 3 of
2009 on National Land
Policy
The policy encourages efficient and sustainable utilization and management of land
and land-based resources for provision of food security.
National Agricultural
Research System (NARS)
Policy (2012)
The policy points out that concerted efforts must be made to address the country’s
vulnerability to climate change and other external shocks. It recommends putting in
place Virtual Research Platforms to handle emerging and cross-cutting issues that
include natural resource and livelihood systems, bioethics, ecosystems resilience,
integrated natural resources management and climate change among others. It also
mentions that redefined research agenda should give priority to climate change
mitigation and adaptation and continue to cover sustainable use and conservation of
natural resources (land, forest, flora and fauna) among other priorities.
Livestock Policy 2008/
Sessional Paper No.2
The policy proposes to set up measures to institutionalize and address drought
related challenges through adoption of the necessary mitigation interventions.
Further, it proposes to create a favorable environment and mechanisms to strengthen
capacity of the existing early warning systems and ensure that the operations of such
systems are well coordinated to cover all disaster vulnerable areas adequately.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
14
2.4	 Agricultural Growth and Development
2.4.1. Land degradation and declining soil health
In many parts of the country, demand on land for agricultural development and pressures from a rapidly
growing population have led to unprecedented land use changes.
As a result, unsustainable land use is causing land degradation resulting into loss of land productivity.
Land degradation (both chemical and physical) manifests itself in many forms such as soil erosion,
loss of soil fertility, salinity, reduced vegetation cover, reduced biodiversity and ecosystem services and
reduced livestock carrying capacity. The impacts of land degradation are closely linked to poverty and
food insecurity.
2.4.2. Agricultural finance and investments
Agriculture offers the best prospect for economic growth and development in Kenya given its contribution
to the GDP, government revenue and benefits to both urban and rural households. However, available
statistics show that attention to the agricultural sector is inadequate in terms of both government budgetary
allocation and resource utilization. On average, Kenya spent over 10% of its total government budget
on agriculture in the first decade after independence. This declined to an average of 7.5% in the period
between 1980 and 1989 and thereafter dropped to 3% in the 1990 to 2000 period, and to 1.2% in 2000/1
then increased to 6.5% in 2008/9.
Budget allocation declined from 5.1% in 2009/10 to 3.6% in 2012/13 (IEA, 2014). Therefore, the budget
allocation to agriculture sector falls short of meeting the Maputo Declaration of budget allocation of
10% to the agricultural sector. Overtime time, the development partner’s contribution to the domestic
expenditure has increased from 1.9% in 2009/10 to 8.2% in 2012/13 to fill the gaps created by budget
deficits (Figure 8).
Figure 8: Proportion of national government and donor contributions to the agriculture sector
budget
Source: IEA (2014)
The private sectors including financial institutions have been supporting investments related to agriculture
overtime. However, the agricultural sector is perceived to be high risk hence, there has been low investments
by formal financial institutions.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 15
The total agricultural sector budget allocation decreased from KSh. 56.46 Billion in the financial year
(FY) 2014/15 to KSh. 40.57 Billion in FY 2015/16 and increased to KSh. 49.96 Billion in FY 2016/17.
The decrease in FY 2016/17 was due to transfer of the Irrigation and Drainage Infrastructure Programme
to the Ministry of Water and Irrigation. In terms of actual expenditure, it decreased from KSh. 46.92
Billion in FY 2014/15 to KSh. 36. 32 Billion FY 2015/16 then increased to KSh. 41.09 Billion in 2016/17.
The overall sector absorption rate was 83% in the FY 2014/15 compared to 90% in the FY 2015/16 and
82% in the FY 2016/17.
The Second Medium Term Investment Plan (MTIP) 2013-2017 (GoK, 2013b) outlines the government’s
investment strategy for improving the situation through the ASDS 2010-2020 which is aligned to CAADP
(GoK, 2010b). In implementing MTIP, the government seeks to prioritize investments across the country’s
major agro-ecological zones.
2.4.3	 Extension and agro-weather advisory services
2.4.3.1	Extension services
The extension service is one of the critical change agents required in transforming subsistence farming
to modern and commercial agriculture in order to promote household food security, improve income
and reduce poverty levels. The agricultural extension in Kenya dates back to the early 1900’s when the
government through the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Irrigation provided the bulk
of extension services to both small-scale and large-scale farmers. The most notable success was in the
dissemination of hybrid maize technology in the late 1960’s and early 1970’s.
However, after the implementation of structural adjustment programs (SAPs) in the 1980’s, the government
support to extension services decreased. To respond to these challenges, the government formulated the
National Agricultural Extension Policy (NAEP) in 2001 and subsequently the National Agricultural
Sector Extension Policy (NASEP) in 2012 to guide improvements in delivery of extension services. The
policies have been implemented through programmes such as the National Agricultural and Livestock
Extension Program 2000-2005 (NALEP) and the Agricultural Sector Development Support Programme
(ASDSP). NALEP recognized the need to diversify, decentralize and strengthen the provision of extension
services to increase their sustainability and relevance to farmers. The overall aim of ASDSP is to support
the implementation of the ASDS 2010-20 with a goal of transforming Kenya’s agricultural sector into
an innovative, commercially oriented, competitive and modern industry that will contribute to poverty
reduction, improved food security and equity in rural and urban Kenya.
Through the Constitution of Kenya 2010, the extension services were devolved to the county governments
while provision of policy framework, capacity building and standards development remained the mandate
of the national government. Farmers in Kenya need a wide range of advisory services to adapt to climate
change and take advantage of viable options with manageable levels of risk. The extension services require
improvement through public private partnerships for climate smart agriculture practices and technologies.
There is therefore need for policy review and development of extension services delivery standards.
Thus devolved extension services need to be strengthened, harmonized, standardized, prioritized and
streamlined to meet its objectives in service delivery to the farmers.
2.4.3.2  Agro-weather advisory services
The Kenya Meteorological Department (KMD) provides downscaled weather forecasts which it uses
together with other relevant organizations and institutions to develop agro-weather related advisories.
These advisories are meant to increase the adaptive capacity of agriculture value chain actors by improving
access to information on weather and climate patterns. The expected outcomes include improved farm
management capabilities under conditions of climate risks where farmers will plan and manage weather

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
16
risks, maximize productivity and minimize the environmental impacts of farming practices. Some of the
tools used are Short Messaging Service (SMS), Interactive Voice Response (IVR), seasonal print bulletins
and radio programmes. However, the service encounters challenges related to infrastructure, technology,
inadequate dissemination and limited integration of climate information in agricultural research and
development.
2.5 Context of Climate Smart Agriculture
Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) offers an excellent opportunity for agricultural growth. It however,
requires collaborative actions among the various actors including: National and County Governments,
farmers, private sector, civil society organizations (CSOs) and other value chain actors.
The context in which CSA is to be applied in Kenya requires an integrated approach that aims to transform
and re-orientate agricultural systems to sustainably; (i) increase productivity; (ii) adapt and build
resilience to the likely effects of climate change, and, (iii) reduce and/or remove GHG emissions without
compromising productivity.
The CSA objectives are meant to enhance the achievements of national food security and development
goals through:
a) Scaling up/out of proven technologies and practices for resilient livelihoods related to efficient soil
and nutrients management, water and on-farm energy resources.
b)	 Conservation and sustainable use of agro-genetic resources.
c) Sustainable intensification of crop, forage, agroforestry, livestock and fisheries production.
d) Adaptation and mitigation practices in crops, livestock, agroforestry and fisheries production
systems.
e) Efficient management of agricultural commodity value chains.
f) Identifying opportunities to leverage climate finance for CSA, including social protection and safety
nets where economic models are not viable.
g)	 Knowledge sharing and effective learning, strengthening key institutions and systems for CSA
initiatives.
h)	 Mainstreaming CSA elements into national policies and development planning process.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 17
CLIMATE RESIL
CHAPTER THREE:
Beekeeping enterprise; a good example for building resilience and income generation

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
18
FRAMEWORK DESCRIPTION
3.1 Introduction
The KCSAIF is designed to address impacts of climate change challenges to agricultural growth and
development. The Framework is aligned to the government’s commitments and obligations to guide the
transition of the country towards a low-carbon climate resilient development pathway.
The Framework aims at supporting the implementation of the KCSAS 2017-2026 whose objectives are to;
(i) enhance adaptive capacity and resilience of farmers, pastoralists and fisher-folk to the adverse impacts
of climate change; (ii) develop mechanisms that minimize greenhouse gas emissions from agricultural
production systems; (iii) create an enabling regulatory and institutional framework; and (iv) address cross-
cutting issues that adversely impact CSA.
3.2 Goal and Objectives of the Framework
Goal
The overall goal of the Framework is to achieve a long-term national low carbon climate resilient
development pathway, whilst realizing the development goals of Kenya Vision 2030.
Objectives
The Framework has four objectives:
1.	 To develop a sustainable system for achieving a coordinated, coherent and cooperative governance
of climate resilience and low carbon growth in the agricultural sector.
2.	 To mainstream CSA to support the transformation of Kenya’s agricultural sector into an innovative,
commercially oriented, competitive and modern industry that contributes to poverty reduction and
improved food security in Kenya.
3.	 To reduce vulnerability of agriculture systems by cushioning them against the impacts of climate
change and reduce GHG emissions where possible.
4.	 To strengthen communication systems on CSA extension and agro-weather issues
3.3 Framework Implementation Components
The objectives of the Framework are to be realized through implementation of actions designed around
the following four components:
1.	 Institutional coordination.
2.	 Agricultural productivity and integration of value chain approach.
3.	 Building resilience and appropriate mitigation actions.
4.	 Communication systems on CSA extension and agro-weather issues.
The rationale of each component, sub-components and proposed actions are outlined below.
3.3.1	 Component 1: Institutional coordination
Rationale
This component supports the establishment of an inclusive institutional framework for improved agricultural
sector CSA coordination and harmonization, and an enabling policy and institutional environment for the
realization of the CSA objectives in general. The component is designed to strengthen inter-ministerial,
national and county governments, private sector and CSOs, development partners and other non-state
actor’s coordination on CSA related issues.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 19
It will enable support towards enhancing capacity for cross-sectoral planning, communication within and
between ministries, government institutions with different mandates with regard to CSA issues. Further,
the component will enable sector institutions to contribute to and take responsibility for sector-wide
coordination and implementation for more effective delivery of their CSA related mandates.
The sub-components are:
Sub-component 1.1:  Inter-Ministerial and County Government Coordination.
Sub-component 1.2:	 Partnerships with Private Sector and Civil Society Organizations.
Sub-component 1.3:	 Programmatic Coordination with Development Partners.
Sub-component 1.4:	 Research-Extension Liaison Framework.
Sub-component 1.5:	 Climate Smart Agriculture Research Funding.
Sub-component 1.6:	 Appropriate CSA Policies, Strategies and Regulations.
Sub-component 1.7:	 CSA data collection, information management and dissemination systems.
Sub-component 1.8:	 Capacities of institution relevant to CSA at all levels.
3.3.1.1	Sub-component 1.1: Inter-Ministerial and County Government Coordination
This sub-component aims at strengthening the functioning of the KCSAIF at both national and county
levels through establishment and operationalization of coordinating institutions and structures. This will
help to strengthen the capacity for cross-sectoral planning, enhance communication within and between
ministries with different mandates. The expected impacts will be effective coordination among national
sector ministries, county governments, development partners and other actors leading to efficiency and
increased return on investments.
Summary of Actions:
•
Develop and implement an inter-ministerial communications strategy with respect to inter-
ministerial coordination on matters relating to climate smart agriculture.
•
Introduce a biannual joint planning and review session between inter-ministerial team and the
county government executive and chief officers responsible for agriculture.
•
Build capacity of national and county government staff in cross-sectoral planning and
implementation.
•
Strengthen policy review and analytical capacity at the national and county levels of government.
•
Strengthen the planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation at the national and county
levels of government.
•
Establish a framework for disseminating CSA programmatic planning and implementation as well
as annual reports and studies and receiving feedback at national and county levels of government.
•
Annual and biannual Intergovernmental Technical Conference on status of KCSAIF
implementation.
3.3.1.2	Sub-component 1.2: Government partnerships with private sector and civil society
organizations
The aim of this sub-component is to strengthen and create platforms for partnership for both levels of
governments with a broad range of private sector and CSOs and other actors on CSA issues. This will
offer incentives to the private sector to invest in CSA and provide a strong linkage mechanism for sharing
of information, knowledge and skills. The direct impact of the sub-component will be establishment of a
strong platform that will enhance adoption of technological innovations and complementary actions.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
20
Summary of Actions:
•
Engage the private sector to identify opportunities for increased investments in CSA.
•
Organize regular consultative meetings with private sector and CSOs on the planning and
implementation of the CSA Framework.
•
Identify appropriate incentives to catalyse private sector and CSO investments in CSA activities.
•
Develop and publicize country CSA programmes to private sector and CSOs with a view to
identifying areas for their collaboration and participation.
•
Establish communication channels for consultations between private sector and CSOs in the
programmatic planning and implementation of CSA activities at the national and county levels of
government.
•
Promote CSA to agro-pastoralists, fisher folks and farmer organizations and cooperatives.
3.3.1.3	Sub-component 1.3: Programmatic Coordination with Development Partners
To enhance programmatic coordination, the Government of Kenya and development partners will provide
a framework for coordinated responses to policy initiatives and development of a harmonized monitoring
and evaluation. This will enable the sector to have a shared vision, facilitate priority setting and establish
common CSA funding mechanisms.
Summary of Actions:
•
Establish a framework for coordination and collaboration between the two levels of governments
and the development partners on programmatic planning and implementation of CSA initiatives.
•
Establish a harmonised M&E mechanism and reporting for CSA implementation.
•
Establish a joint investment and funding mechanism for CSA in both levels of government.
3.3.1.4	Sub-component 1.4: Research-Extension Liaison framework
The sector experiences fragmented research and extension projects/programmes on CSA. This sub-
component aims at establishing mechanisms to coordinate CSA research and extension, and to promote
collaboration and networking among public and private research institutions. The direct impact of the
sub-component will be efficient research and extension services.
Summary of Actions:
•
Develop an institutional framework for farmer-extension-research and public private partnership
engagement to set the research agenda from the grassroots level.
•
Establish a platform through which researchers will have regular contacts with stakeholders and
other users at the national, county and farm levels.
•
Prepare CSA information packages and disseminate them to stakeholders.
•
Promote use of Information and Communications Technology (ICT) in disseminating research
findings.
•
Conduct participatory research work on improved technologies and practices that is informed by
needs of users and agro-ecological zones along the value chains.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 21
•
Conduct on-farm research into low-cost appropriate technologies and practices and deliver them
as packages.
•
Build the capacity of extension, producers and other stakeholders in the use of existing/new/
improved CSA technologies and practices.
•
Support development of private sector input and appropriate CSA technologies outreach and
distribution networks.
•
Intensify field demonstration, climate field schools, field days, study tours to enhance adoption of
existing, new and/or improved CSA technologies and practices.
•
Intensify use of ICT and other methods of dissemination.
•
Establish systems for research prioritization by counties and other stakeholders.
3.3.1.5	Sub-component 1.5: CSA research funding
This sub-component proposes ways of improving research funding for development of CSA technologies
and innovations. The expected impact is increased CSA innovations and adoption of appropriate
technologies by farmers and other actors.
Summary of Actions:
•
Sensitize public and private sector to invest in CSA research.
•
Incentivize private sector investments in research, development and innovations.
•
Establish partnership with development partners to support CSA research.
•
Capacity build research institutions on CSA technologies and innovations development.
•
Establish coordination systems to steer CSA research efforts and activities.
•
Develop an information flow mechanism among CSA research stakeholders.
3.3.1.6	Sub-component 1.6: Appropriate CSA policies, strategies and regulations
This sub-component aims at supporting the establishment of an enabling regulatory framework for CSA. The
sector has inadequate regulatory framework to provide guidance and incentives for CSA implementation.
The expected outcomes will be appropriate sector CSA policies, strategies and regulations that provides
enabling environment for climate change response.
Summary of Actions:
•
Sensitization of stakeholders.
•
Review and catalogue policies, strategies and regulations and identify need for revision.
•
Support revision and formulation of appropriate policies, strategies and regulations.
•
Lobbying for changes/adoption in the policies and regulations.
•
Facilitate roll-out of adopted policies, strategies and regulations.
•
Domesticate relevant CSA policies, strategies and regulation in counties.
•
Develop appropriate policies that enhance production of adequate and diversified food products.
•
Develop legislation and systems to protect and cushion small scale farmers and producers from
unfair competition from corporate entities.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
22
3.3.1.7	Sub-component 1.7: CSA data collection, information management and
dissemination systems
This sub-component aims at enhancing CSA information and communication systems. There are weak
mechanisms for collecting data and information on climate change which make it difficult to track progress,
share results and access information on CSA. Under this sub-component, enhanced availability of relevant
and harmonized CSA information and communication across the sector will be established.
Summary of Actions:
•
Support strengthening of existing CSA monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and dissemination of
information.
•
Establish KCSAIF M&E system at all levels, ensuring that it is aligned with the agricultural sector
M&E system, National Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (NCCSAP) M&E system and
National Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Systems (NIMES) as necessary.
•
Facilitate development of CSA communication strategy.
•
Facilitate establishment of inventory of existing climate change information and communication
systems in the agricultural sector and assessment of their appropriateness for different users.
•
Facilitate design of agricultural sector climate information management system based on existing
systems.
•
Collaborate with other service providers in continuous updating of existing agricultural sector
climate information systems, and production and distribution of other information materials.
•
Facilitate development/strengthening of interactive ICT platforms to provide agricultural sector
climate information on value chains, service providers, etc.
•
Support up-scaling on the use of mobile telephony in disseminating agricultural sector climate
change extension messages and collection of climate data.
3.3.1.8	Sub-component 1.8: Strengthening institutional capacities
The main focus of this sub-component is to strengthen the institutional capacities for implementation of the
Framework. The expected outputs are improved performance for efficient and harmonized implementation
of CSA among sector institutions.
Summary of Actions:
•
Facilitate capacity needs assessment on CSA issues at national and county levels of government.
•
Facilitate development of CSA capacity building approach and plan for the sector which integrates
gender and social inclusiveness.
•
Facilitate roll-out of capacity building plans and approaches.
•
Support training institutions/service providers to develop CSA training programmes relevant to
the emergin g needs of the counties.
3.3.2	 Component 2: Agricultural productivity and integration of value chain approach
Rationale
This component is expected to play a major role in ensuring improved agricultural productivity along the
value chains. This is aimed at building resilience of agricultural value chain players through use of adaptive

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 23
technologies and enhanced market linkages. The component will also promote commercialization, food
safety and quality control standards along the value chains.
The specific sub-components are:
Sub-component 2.1:	 Access to and use of adaptive technologies.
Sub-component 2.2: Increase area under efficient irrigation.
Sub-component 2.3:	 Value addition and products development.
Sub-component 2.4:	 Competitiveness and markets access for climate smart products enhanced.
Sub-component 2.5:	 Food and feed storage and distribution.
3.3.2.1	Sub-component 2.1: Access to and use of adaptive technologies
This sub-component aims to enhance adoption of improved and adaptive crop, livestock and aquaculture
technologies. The sector experiences low use of improved technologies and practices, use of inefficient
technologies and practices, increased incidences of diseases and pests, inadequate access and availability,
and low use of integrated water resources management (IWRM). These challenges lead to low agricultural
productivity, food and nutritional insecurity, low levels of income and hence high poverty levels. While
upholding its overall focus on supporting enhancement of resilient low-carbon agricultural productivity
the sub-component will make particular effort to promote a value chain integration approach.
Summary of Actions:
•
Identify, update, disseminate and upscale existing climate smart agricultural technologies and
practices.
•
Introduce diversified and improved crop varieties (high yielding, short duration, disease and pest
tolerant, high nutritive value, flood tolerant), including indigenous varieties.
•
Increase use of integrated soil fertility management practices, including soil testing and soil
nutrient management.
•
Strengthen surveillance of agricultural inputs trade.
•
Improve agricultural mechanization by adopting appropriate machinery and equipment.
•
Improve production of indigenous fruits and vegetables.
•
Monitor household food security and safety.
•
Enhance use of low greenhouse gas emitting crop production technologies and practices.
•
Introduce improved exotic livestock breeds and improved indigenous/local adapted breeds.
•
Promote adoption of low emission technologies from the livestock value chain.
•
Improved nutrition through supplementation, forage and fodder conservation and irrigated pastures
and fodder.
•
Adequate disease surveillance and disease control and regular vaccination campaigns.
•
Increase community managed drug stores through provision of livestock drugs within reach of
pastoralists
•
Promote livestock value chain diversification.
•
Upscale climate smart fish culture technologies.
•
Enhance quality control and food safety by relevant institutions along crop, livestock and fisheries
value chains.
•
Enhance use of low greenhouse gas emitting fish production technologies and practices.
•
Promote integrated farming systems comprising crops, livestock, aquaculture and farm forestry.
•
Create awareness and capacity build women, youth and venerable groups (WY&VG) on CSA.
•
Promote CSA related income generating activities targeted for WY&VG.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
24
•
Promote sustainable natural resources management.
•
Promote climate smart fish capture technologies.
•
Establish gene banks for crops, livestock and fish.
•
Intensify surveillance and control of emerging livestock pests and diseases.
•
Promote rehabilitation of degraded rangelands.
•
Promote sustainable livestock stocking capacity.
•
Harmonize livestock vaccinations across the bordering counties and across the international
borders.
•
Facilitate management of veterinary drug residues, carcasses and agrochemicals.
•
Promote efficient use of farm mechanization.
•
Promote mechanized and animal powered conservation tillage practices as compared to
conventional tillage.
•
Promote value addition of farm produce through cottage industries.
3.3.2.2	Sub-Component 2.2: Increase area under efficient irrigation
The sub-component aims at increasing the area under efficient and renewable energy powered irrigation
systems as well as improving water resource-use efficiency in existing and new irrigation systems. Some
of the climate change challenges the irrigation sub-sector experiences include; inadequate infrastructure
development for irrigation, drainage and water storage, low productivity and poor water management.
The actions under this sub-component focus on promoting use of green energy in both existing and new
irrigation systems as well as enhancing efficient water management practices.
Summary of Actions:
•
Increase use of appropriate renewable energy technologies in irrigation systems.
•
Incorporate gravity fed system in abstraction and distribution of water to reduce energy used in
irrigation.
•
Use of efficient water technologies in irrigation.
•
Build technical capacity to establish and maintain renewable energy innovations.
•
Increase area under micro-irrigation schemes.
•
Ensure water used for irrigation is safe.
•
Promote development and dissemination of appropriate efficient small-scale irrigation technological
packages.
•
Build capacity of extension workers and farmers on participatory irrigation management.
•
Build the capacity of water users associations in agricultural water management and their
obligations as major beneficiaries.
•
Undertake comprehensive management needs assessment of existing large-scale irrigation
schemes.
•
Conduct studies on the irrigation potential and identify sites in various river floodplains and
underground water sources for micro-irrigation systems.
•
Provide technical backstopping and training of local artisans on irrigation technologies.
•
Integrate the water needs of livestock and fish in all new irrigation designs.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 25
•
Design and develop water harvesting and storage structures.
•
Climate proof water harvesting, storage structures and infrastructure.
•
Enhance waste water management for agriculture.
•
Promote development of flood control infrastructure.
•
Address issues of siltation of water bodies.
3.3.2.3	Sub-Component 2.3: Value addition and products development
This sub-component aims at supporting the development of new safe and commercially viable products
for priority value chains in each agro-ecological zone. Most agricultural commodities are sold in their raw
form and are thus bulky, of low value and have short shelf lives. There is also no traceability mechanism for
produce and products from farm to folk. Value addition will ensure longer shelf life, reduced transaction
costs and higher incomes.
Summary of Actions:
•
Identify and promote existing value addition technologies.
•
Incentivize the private sector to invest in agricultural value addition.
•
Map county specific value chains for various produce and product’s comparative advantage.
•
Promote value addition of counties priority value chains.
•
Link producers with input suppliers, output markets and service providers along the value chains.
•
Promote establishment of structured trading systems at county levels.
•
Establish standards and traceability systems for all the new products.
•
Undertake market feasibility studies to promote demand for the selected commodities and link
them with consumption patterns and preferences/consumer demands.
•
Establish regional hubs (a cluster of counties in the same AEZ) for value chain development and
backstopping.
•
Identify and build capacity of actors in value chain processes.
•
Facilitate improved accessibility to financial services.
•
Promote, establish and strengthen cooperatives/producer organizations.
•
Promote cottage industries for value addition.
•
Promote sanitary measures on crops, livestock, fish inputs and their products.
•
Strengthen crop, livestock and fish health inspectorate.
3.3.2.4	 Sub-component 2:4: Competitiveness and markets access for climate smart
products
This sub-component aims at achieving increased locally and internationally marketed agricultural outputs
and to expand the export markets to include non-traditionally exported agricultural commodities. This will
also involve developing and improving grading and standards for agricultural commodities. The sector is
faced with a number of challenges which include low levels of local market penetration by smallholder
producers; low capitalization of bulk traders; inadequate grading and standardization systems; inadequate
awareness of the standards by producers and consumers; limited capacity to fully comply with international
sanitary and phytosanitary standards (SPS). Others include inadequate incentives to comply with national,
regional and global standards and inadequate mechanisms to cushion small scale producers, prohibitive
regulatory and marketing barriers to regional trade and inadequate markets and marketing infrastructure.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
26
Summary of Actions:
•
Establish the existing storage capacity of agricultural commodities in public and private sector
levels with a view to identify gaps and areas that need strengthening.
•
Create agricultural commodity hubs through participation of private sector and other stakeholders.
•
Facilitate capacity building of farmers on demand and market driven production.
•
Design and launch a market promotion program for locally produced commodities.
•
Link producer to external niche markets.
•
Facilitate capacity building of producers on SPS and international trade.
•
Identify, update and adopt appropriate traditional and indigenous food preservation methods.
•
Develop branding of Kenya produce for regional and international markets.
•
Streamline and harmonize cess fees and levies to enhance access to markets.
•
Identify and define the non-traditional agricultural commodities that give comparative advantage.
•
Design sustainable programmes to support the certification of smallholders/producers for export
markets.
•
Facilitate capacity building of farmers on selected non-traditional agricultural commodities.
•
Develop and implement grading and standardization systems for agricultural commodities that do
not have grades and standards to comply with regional and global requirements.
•
Establish mechanisms that promote compliance of Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs).
•
Train and empower smallholder producers along value chains on grading and standardization
systems.
•
Enhance surveillance of imports of counterfeit agricultural products and inputs.
•
Strengthen and broaden scope of existing agricultural market information systems
3.3.2.5	Sub-component 2.5: Food and Feed storage and distribution
The sector experiences various challenges which include, high post-harvest losses along value chains,
inadequate preservation and storage capacity, food safety issues as result of poor post-harvest handling
and storage technologies, inadequate storage skills and marketing infrastructure. This sub-component aims
to achieve four objectives namely; (i) reduction of post-harvest losses along agricultural value chains; (ii)
enhancing private sector annual storage capacity for agricultural products; (iii) enhancing communities
and household capacity to store agricultural produce; and (iv) expanding the strategic food reserve to
include all appropriate agricultural products and establish strategic feed/grazing reserves.
Summary of Actions:
•
Invest in appropriate storage facilities and technologies along value chains.
•
Train producers, processers and marketers in post-harvest management as well as food safety.
•
Provide regular market information to improve distribution of agricultural commodities/food
stuffs.
•
Facilitate establishment of marketing centres in rural areas with the appropriate infrastructure.
•
Link communities in each county by feeder roads to various marketing centres and highways.
•
Conduct a survey to identify, update and adopt traditional and indigenous food preservation
methods.
•
Apply and use appropriate policies to produce adequate and diversified food products.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 27
•
Conduct inventory of private sector annual storage capacity with a view to identifying gaps and
areas of strengthening.
•
Strengthen the warehousing receipt system and link producers to warehousing receipt system in
the commodity supply chain.
•
Rehabilitate existing warehouses, cold storage facilities and silos and establish public-private-
partnerships management.
•
Support private sector to invest in food processing (including abattoirs) as well as value addition,
including packaging, and branding.
•
Facilitate linkages with relevant service providers and markets (inputs and outputs).
•
Carry out a survey to identify current household and community capacity to store agricultural
produce.
•
Enhance farmers’ capacity to deal with postharvest pests.
•
Support communities and households to store surplus produce.
•
Expand the strategic food reserve to include all appropriate agricultural foodstuffs.
•
Establish and expand strategic feed/grazing reserves.
•
Encourage growing on-farm food security crops that can be harvested regularly (e.g. cassava,
sweet potatoes, bananas, yams, arrow roots, etc.).
•
Promote safe and effective use of chemicals during storage.
•
Support rehabilitation of rangelands through reseeding community lands
•
Promote the establishment of meat and fish processing plants in counties for local and export
markets.
•
Support pasture establishment and management.
•
Support regular epidemiological studies on livestock diseases based on climate change trends.
•
Establish animal health infrastructure such as laboratories, mobile vehicle/ambulatory units and
bio-security and bio-safety structures.
3.3.3	 Component 3: Building resilience and appropriate mitigation actions
Rationale
This component aims at building resilience through adaptation and appropriate mitigation measures. This
will be achieved through improved management of natural resource base and development of safety nets
along the value chains.
The component will also play a major role in identification and deployment of appropriate measures that
minimize GHG emissions in agricultural production systems. The specific sub-components are:
Sub-component 3.1:	 Soil health and land degradation.
Sub-component 3.2:	 Water and other natural resources.
Sub-component 3.3:	 Insurance and other safety nets.
Sub-component 3.4:	 Synergies in adaptation and mitigation.
3.3.3.1	Sub-component 3.1: Soil health and land degradation
The objectives of this sub-component are aimed at enhancing adoption of climate smart soil management
technologies/practices and rehabilitation of degraded lands. The challenges to be addressed include;
nutrient depletion, loss of biodiversity, land degradation, soil erosion, soil acidity and low adoption of CSA
technologies and practices. These and other unsustainable land and soil management practices contribute
to GHG emissions.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
28
Summary of Actions:
•
Establish soil and land management knowledge hubs across the country.
•
Promote soil and water conservation practices.
•
Promote rehabilitation of degraded lands.
•
Promote integrated soil fertility management.
•
Promote conservation agriculture.
•
Support agro-forestry.
•
Promote sustainable land management practices.
•
Promote sustainable grazing management practices.
•
Promote development of innovations and technologies to enhance soil health.
3.3.3.2	Sub-component 3.2: Water and other natural resources
This sub-component aims at enhancing integration of CSA practices towards conservation and
rehabilitation of water catchment areas, increasing tree cover, and conservation of fisheries resources. The
key challenges addressed include degradation of water catchment areas, soil erosion, siltation, pollution
of water bodies, eutrophication, low tree cover in agricultural areas, forest degradation and deforestation,
loss of biodiversity, land use change and resource use conflict and encroachment.
Summary of Actions:
•
Promote CSA practices that enhance sustainable natural resources management.
•
Promote integrated watershed management.
•
Establish a natural resources inventory.
•
Establish a monitoring, reporting and accounting mechanism on land use and natural resources.
•
Identify, gazette and conserve fish breeding areas and nursery grounds.
•
Facilitate the rehabilitation of fish breeding sites/grounds.
•
Facilitate restocking of water bodies with fish fingerlings.
•
Promote bee keeping and other non-wood forest products that contribute to forest conservation.
•
Promote integrated rangeland management.
•
Promote incentives for ecosystem management e.g. payment for ecosystem services.
•
Develop and implement management plans for ecosystems in order to encourage sustainable use
of natural resources.
•
Establish public private partnerships (PPP) in conservation of water and natural resources.
•
Promote sustainable fish harvesting regime in fresh waters.
•
Develop climate smart riverine and dam fisheries.
•
Conserve riparian area with the aim of controlling invasive species.
•
Protect and restore water catchment areas through afforestation and reforestation.
3.3.3.3	Sub-component 3.3: Insurance and other safety nets
The objectives of this sub-component are aimed at increasing crop, livestock and fisheries index-based
insurance and establishing a safety net mechanism for residual loss and damage. The sector increasingly
experiences vulnerability due to risks related to climate change. There is need to develop mechanisms
for risk transfer and management; knowledge dissemination on importance of agricultural insurance and
safety nets.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 29
Summary of Actions:
•
Develop and implement innovative index-based agricultural insurance packages for crop, livestock
and fisheries value chains.
•
Invest in the agro-meteorological infrastructure to support index-based agricultural insurance.
•
Enhance the capacity of various actors to deliver innovative crop, fisheries and livestock index-
based insurance packages.
•
Raise awareness within the insurance industry on climate risks and communicate actions and
opportunities in the agricultural sector.
•
Establish and strengthen climate risk appropriate safety nets.
•
Develop insurance legislations within the agricultural sector.
•
Construct vulnerability maps to support targeting of food security and emergency preparedness
interventions.
•
Establish a National Seed Emergency stock.
3.3.3.4	Sub-component 3.4: Synergies in adaptation and mitigation
The agriculture sector is a source of GHG emissions with enteric fermentation accounting for the highest
proportion. However, some adaptation actions have mitigation co-benefits such as increased soil carbon
having beneficial effects on soil fertility. The objective of this sub-component is to promote adaptation
interventions and appropriate mitigation that leads to reduced GHG emissions intensity from the agriculture
sector without compromising productivity. It will also promote development of accounting systems on
agricultural emissions.
Summary of Actions:
•
Promote adoption of low cost climate smart technologies that minimize GHG emission and
enhance removals.
•
Promote low cost green energy for the agriculture sector.
•
Promote efficiency in livestock production systems.
•
Promote efficiency in paddy rice management.
•
Promote appropriate livestock manure management.
•
Promote formulation of feeds and feeds additives that improve efficiency and reduce enteric
fermentation.
•
Promote production of rain-fed rice to reduce emissions from paddy rice production systems.
•
Develop and implement agricultural sector Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs).
•
Promote adaptation actions that have mitigation co-benefits.
•
Minimize use of fires in rangelands and croplands management.
•
Promote use of energy efficient technologies in production, harvesting, processing and
transportation of agricultural inputs and products.
•
Develop a national carbon accounting (NCA) system including establishment of monitoring,
reporting and verification (MRV) infrastructure in the agriculture sector.
•
Undertake capacity building on measurement of GHGs emissions; management of inventory
system; data collection, reporting and verification in the agriculture sector.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
30
•
Conduct energy audits of CSA practices.
•
Promote production of climate smart alternative livelihoods.
•
Promote climate smart practices that contribute to reduction of emissions from deforestation and
forest degradation.
3.3.4	 Component 4: Communication systems on CSA extension and agro-weather issues
Rationale
This component aims at strengthening and mainstreaming communication systems on CSA, extension and
agro-weather issues among stakeholders in the agriculture sector. In addition, the component will promote
generation, access and enhanced application of CSA knowledge among value chain actors. Further, the
component will support strengthening of systems for timely provision of climate forecasts to different
value chain stakeholders.
The sub-components are:
Sub-component 4.1:	 CSA knowledge generation and dissemination.
Sub-component 4.2:	 Extension on climate information services and agro-weather advisories.
3.3.4.1	Sub-component 4.1: CSA knowledge generation and dissemination
There is inadequate information, knowledge generation and management as well as limited understanding
of the CSA concept. The objectives of this sub-component are: (i) to enhance generation and dissemination
of CSA technologies and innovations along the value chains; (ii) to document, package, and disseminate
best CSA practices and technologies; (iii) to establish functional national and county CSA knowledge
and information management systems; and (iv) to strengthen and maintain CSA knowledge networks and
partnerships.
Summary of Actions:
•
Enhance the capacities of private sector service providers and farmer-based organizations to
support farmers’ adoption of existing/new/improved CSA technologies and practices.
•
Develop and integrate the CSA concept into national extension system.
•
Advocate for integration of CSA in formal education systems.
•
Support undertaking of genetic characterization and conservation of indigenous livestock breeds,
crops, fisheries and forestry.
•
Promote genetic improvement of key crops, livestock, fisheries and forestry to enhance adaptability.
•
Support development and adoption of climate smart innovative agricultural products.
•
Mobilize resources and institute competitive grant scheme for CSA research.
•
Undertake a CSA knowledge mapping, audit and analysis.
•
Establish and develop gender sensitive CSA knowledge at the community, county and national
levels.
•
Support capacity building of different stakeholders in CSA along the agricultural value chain at
the national, county and local levels.
•
Establish a robust CSA knowledge platforms.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 31
•
Identify, document and integrate indigenous and conventional CSA knowledge.
•
Support dissemination of improved CSA technologies and practices.
•
Disseminate and update CSA information materials to support and inform policies, planning and
agricultural advisory services.
•
Strengthen CSA knowledge and information sharing partnerships/networks/forums.
•
Establish a surveillance system for crops, livestock and fisheries pests and diseases arising from
climate change effects.
•
Build the capacity of extension, producers and other stakeholders in the use of existing/new/
improved CSA technologies and practices.
•
Intensify field demonstration/field days/study tours to enhance adoption of existing/new/improved
CSA technologies and practices.
•
Undertake training needs assessment for CSA.
•
Develop information that promote production of emerging climate smart crops, livestock, fish and
forestry enterprises.
•
Conduct on-farm research into low-cost appropriate technologies and practices.
3.3.4.2	Sub-component 4.2: Extension on climate information services and agro-weather
advisories
The objectives of this sub-component are: (i) to increase agro-climate information services and timely-use
of agro-weather products; and (ii) to enhance and upscale early warning systems and contingency plans
for climate change adaptation. Limited weather infrastructure, inadequate climate information services
and agro-weather advisories hinder agricultural planning and farm management decision making. Further,
there is limited integration of climate information in agricultural research.
Summary of Actions:
•
Strengthen weather forecasting to inform decision making in agriculture.
•
Strengthen integration of indigenous knowledge with scientific weather knowledge.
•
Develop and upscale appropriate climate/weather infrastructure.
•
Develop climate risk contingency plans at national, county and community levels.
•
Downscale weather forecasts to various localities to promote the appropriate climate/weather
services.
•
Institutionalize pre-season, in-season and post-season community weather scenario planning and
agro-weather monitoring.
•
Strengthen integration of climate information into agricultural research.
•
Strengthen production of downscaled efficient Early Warning Systems.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
32
CHAPTER Four:

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 33
4.1.1 Intergovernmental Forum on Agriculture (IGF)
The IGF which is convened by the Cabinet Secretary (CS) responsible for agriculture and irrigation and co-
chaired by Chair of the Council of Governors will be expected to provide a platform for CSA stakeholder’s
consultations and cooperation. It will also approve and make recommendations on the CSA programmes,
strategies, plans and performance monitoring instruments.
4.1.2	 The Joint Agriculture Sector Steering Committee (JASSCOM)
This committee will provide regular direction for sector transformation initiatives agreed between the
two levels of government and makes follow-up of IGF meetings. It will also oversee the functioning of
the Joint Agriculture Sector Intergovernmental Secretariat (JAS-IGS) and the Joint Agriculture Sector
Technical Working Groups (JAS-TWGs). The committee will be expected to ensure that CSA decisions
and resolutions approved by IGF are circulated and implemented by relevant entities within the two levels
of government.
4.1.3 Joint Agriculture Sector Technical  Working Groups (JAS-TWGs)
The JAS-TWGs will aim at providing a uniform platform for intergovernmental technical consultation based
on the principle of equitable representation at the two levels of government to enhance its effectiveness. It
is expected that implementation of the CSA Framework will be aligned within the six JAS-TWGs. These
JAS-TWGs will be expected to deliberate on CSA issues in the areas of responsibility of each working
group. They will also prepare and submit CSA reports and resolutions to the Joint Agriculture Sector
Steering Committee.
COORDINATION AND IMPLEMENTATION MECHANISM
4.1	 Coordination
This Framework will be implemented within the Joint Consultation and Cooperation Mechanism for the
Agricultural Sector (JCCMAS) which is in line with Intergovernmental Relations Act 2012 (Figure 9).
Figure 9: Technical reporting and information sharing through the Joint Consultation and
Cooperation Mechanism for the Agricultural Sector
IGR Summit
Intergovernmental Forum on
Agriculture (IGF)
Joint Agricultural Sector
Technical Working
Groups (JAS-TWGs)
Joint Agriculture
Intergovernmental
Secretariat
(JAS-IGS)

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
34
4.1.4 Climate Change Units (CCUs)
The Climate Change Act 2016 Section 15 provides for public entities to coordinate mainstreaming of
climate change issues into sectoral strategies, plans, programmes and projects. Further the Act requires
that each state department and National government public entity to establish a CCU. The CCUs will be
charged with coordinating implementation of CSA activities at the national and county levels. The units
will be expected to communicate decisions of JAS-TWGs to implementing entities. Further, they will be
expected to provide technical support to the management and CSA implementing stakeholders including
reporting.
4.2 Linkages and Partnerships with other Key Actors
The interventions of KCSAIF will be implemented under pluralistic and partnership-based principles. In
addition, relevant partners will provide inputs towards defined interventions among them national and
county agriculture departments, other government organizations, research institutes, farmer organizations,
private sector organizations and CSOs.
The relevant Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) at the two levels of government are expected
to support the implementation of various components of the Framework. They will be responsible for
mainstreaming and upscaling CSA across their functions and processes including consideration in
performance contracting. They will be expected to play a key role in provision of an enabling policy
environment, provision and mobilization of resources and technical expertise for implementation of
the KCSAIF. The farmer organizations consisting of cooperatives and farmer groups will be key in
identification, prioritizing and implementation of agriculture interventions. They will be expected to play
a major role in awareness creation, community and resource mobilization, coordination of investments
and partnerships among stakeholders for implementation of the KCSAIF.
The private sector is a strategic partner in the agriculture sector development and is therefore expected
to participate in implementation of the KCSAIF. The private sector will facilitate/support value chain
development, provision of business and services through entrepreneurship investments, input supply,
provision of credit and insurance services among others. Through PPP mechanisms, the private sector will
engage with both levels of government to implement specific aspects of interest/specialization in KCSAIF.
The Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) will play an important role in advocacy, capacity building and
support implementation of CSA interventions. The research institutions and academia will be key in
technology development, validation and evaluation, capacity building and strategic input support.
The development partners are significant players in promoting CSA and to a larger extent low carbon
resilient agriculture.  They will be expected to support financing and resource mobilization, technical
expertise and capacity building. Further, the development partners will assist in building networks that
enhance access to global climate finance to support CSA.
4.3 Implementation of KCSAIF
After the launch of KCSAIF, some key actions necessary to facilitate its implementation will be carried
out. These include sensitization of stakeholders, prioritization of actions at both national and county
levels as well as resources mobilization for implementation of the prioritized actions. The capacity
of stakeholders on CSA will need to be enhanced and the necessary links for implementation of the
framework at national, county and community levels will be established. A monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) framework including MRV will be developed and implemented throughout the implementation
period through participatory approaches by all relevant stakeholders at the various levels. All activities to

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 35
be implemented including monitoring and reporting for the KCSAIF will be coordinated by the National
and County Ministries/Departments of Agriculture and Irrigation CCUs who will be reporting through the
JASSCOM.
4.3.1 Monitoring, Evaluation and Reporting
The aim of the KCSAIF M&E framework will be to guide coordinated and efficient data collection,
analysis, use and provision of information that will provide indications of impact, outcomes and outputs.
The monitoring will measure CSA achievements at the activity and output levels while the evaluation
will measure achievements at the outcomes and impact levels. The M&E will be carried out by the two
levels of government together with other relevant stakeholders spearheaded by the climate change units.
The M&E plan will be agreed upon between the national and county governments through the JASSCOM
thematic working group on monitoring, evaluation and communication which will also be responsible for
the design and implementation of the M&E system.
The M&E will be based on Logical Framework Approach (LFA) and will be aligned to the sector M&E
framework. Some specific key indicators are presented in the KCSAIF log frame (Annex I) which
the climate change units will be expected to adopt in addition to developing others for presentation to
the technical working group (TWG) for consideration and approval. Wherever possible, data will be
disaggregated by gender to allow for social inclusivity principle in CSA interventions. This will be done
on quarterly basis and the JAS-TWG monitoring, evaluation and communication will coordinate data
analysis and consolidation of reports.
The KCSAIF envisages that evaluation will be done at various levels as follows:
(i)	 Baseline surveys to collect baseline data on vulnerability levels and low-carbon development path
way in the implementation of CSA actions. This survey will provide information base against which
CSA activities will be monitored and assessed for effectiveness during implementation and after the
activities. The analysis of baseline data will be disaggregated per county for assessing the effects
and impacts across gender and other social economic aspects.
(ii)  Mid-term (five years) review aimed at evaluating the relevance, effectiveness and efficiency of
implementation of the KCSAIF against indicators in the log frame. The review will assess the
implementation approaches, strategies, organizational set up and partnership arrangements. The
review will make recommendations for the remaining period largely to help enhance implementation
and improve performance. The review will also consider technical aspects of resilience and low-
carbon development in KCSAIF.
(iii)	Terminal (ten years) evaluation will be conducted at the end of the Framework period to analyze
impacts and learning experiences.
4.3.2 Reporting
The climate change units will be responsible for preparing relevant reports on the progress of implementation
of the KCSAIF approved work plans. The reports will also include assessment of processes, results and
outcomes and analysis of factors affecting progress during the reporting period. The reports from CCUs
will be presented to the JAS-TWGs which will facilitate preparation of intergovernmental CSA reports
for presentation to the JASSCOM. The JASSCOM will review and adopt the reports before forwarding
them to the IGF for endorsement and for submissions as provided for in the Intergovernmental Relations
Act and Kenya Climate Change Act 2016.  The frequency of the reporting will be annual or as may be
required.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
36
4.3.3 Quality Assurance
Quality assurance will ensure that standards set for implementation and management of the implementation
framework are adhered to in order to achieve the desired results.
The KCSAIF management structure comprising committees as contained in the JASSCOM will provide
advisory role in supporting interventions that ensure quality assurance. The activities in the logical
framework will provide the basis for development of a tool against which quality assurance will be based.
4.3.4 Budget
The KCSAIF investments are aligned with sector investment priorities and linked to climate vulnerability
and priority areas. The total base case budget requirement to implement the programme is KSh. 167.31
Billion up to the year 2027 (Table 3). These resources will be mobilized from the national funding sources,
bilateral and multilateral development partners in climate finance, Adaptation Fund, Green Climate Fund
and from the private sector. All funds shall be audited in accordance with the specific financial management
agreements with major reference to Climate Finance Policy (GoK, 2017b).
Table 3: KCSAIF ten year budget summary
Component/Sub-component
2018-2022
2023-2027
Total Budget
(Billions KSh.)
Institutional coordination
14.72
14.72
29.44
Agricultural productivity and integration of value chains
approach
25.76
26.99
52.75
Building resilience and associated mitigation actions
14.72
14.72
29.44
Communication systems on CSA, extension and
agro-weather issues
20.24
20.24
40.48
Monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
7.60
7.60
15.20
Total
83.04
84.27
167.31

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 37
REFERENCES
D’Alessandro, S.P., Caballero, J., litchte, J. and Simpkin, S. (2015) Kenya Agricultural Sector Risk
Assesment
Global Practice Technical Assistance Paper, World Bank Group Report. No. 97887, 2015
GoK. (2001). The 1999 population and housing census. Central Bureau of Statistics, Ministry of Finance
and Planning, Government of Kenya.
GoK. (2003). Economic Recovery Strategy for Wealth and Employment Creation.  Ministry of Planning
and National Development, Government of Kenya.
GoK. (2004). Strategy for Revitalizing Agriculture 2004-2014. Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of
Livestock and Fisheries Development, Government of Kenya.
GoK. (2007). Kenya Vision 2030. Government of Kenya.
GoK. (2008). First Medium Term Plan, 2008 – 2012. Ministry of State for Planning, National Development
and Vision 2030, Government of Kenya.
GoK. (2009). Agricultural Farm Forestry Rules 2009. Government of Kenya.
GoK. (2010a). Constitution of Kenya 2010. Government of Kenya.
GoK. (2010b). Agricultural Sector Development Strategy 2010-2020. Government of Kenya.
GoK. (2010c). National Climate Change Response Strategy. Ministry of Environment and Mineral
Resources, Government of Kenya.
GoK. (2013a). National Climate Change Action Plan 2013-2017. Government of Kenya.
GoK. (2013b). Second Medium Term Plan 2013 – 2017. Transforming Kenya: Pathway to Devolution,
Socio-Economic Development, Equity and National Unity. Ministry of Devolution and Planning,
Government of Kenya.
GoK. (2015). Economic Survey Annual Report 2015. Government of Kenya.
GoK. (2016a). Kenya National Adaptation Plan 2015-2030. Government of Kenya.
GoK. (2016b). Economic Survey Annual Report 2016, Government of Kenya.
GoK. (2016c). Fisheries Statistical Bulletin. Government of Kenya.
GoK. (2017a). Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Strategy 2017-2026. Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock
and Fisheries, Government of Kenya.
GoK. (2017b). Climate Finance Policy 2017. Government of Kenya.
IEA. (2014). Public Spending in Agriculture in Kenya, PFA Report. Institute of Economic Affairs.
Jaetzold, R., H. Schmidt, B. Hornetz and C. Shisanya. (2009). Farm Management Handbook of Kenya
Vol. II Part A: West Kenya. Ministry of Agriculture, Kenya and GTZ, Germany.
KFS. (2013). Report on National Forest Resource Mapping and Capacity Development for the Republic
of Kenya, Volume 1. Submitted by PASCO Corporation. Kenya Forest Service.
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries, Livestock sector. Report (2016)
NEMA. (2015). Kenya National Second Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change. National Environment Management Authority.
SEI. (2009). The Economics of Climate Change in Kenya: Final report submitted in advance of COP15.
Stockholm Environment Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. pp 65.
UNEP. (2009). Kenya: Atlas of Our Changing Environment. Division of Early Warning and Assessment
(DEWA), United Nations Environment Programme.
UNEP. (2015). Green Economy Sector Study on Agriculture in Kenya. United Nations Environment
Programme. pp 34.
WB. (2000). World Development Report 2000/2001: Attacking Poverty. The World Bank, Washington,
D.C.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
38
CHAPTER FIVE:
ANNEXES
Dorper sheep grazing in Laikipia
Dairy Cattle grazing in Nyandarua

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 39
Annex 1: Kenya CSA Implementation Framework Result-Based Log Frame
NARRATIVE SUMMARY
INDICATORS
MEANS OF VERIFICATION
RISKS AND ASSUMPTIONS
OVERALL GOAL:
The overall goal of the
framework is to achieve
a long-term national low
carbon climate resilient
development pathway,
whilst realizing the
development goals of
Kenya Vision 2030.
G1: Climate change adaptation
investments in the agricultural
sector.
G2: Total agricultural sector GHG
emissions.
G3: GHG emissions per unit of
agricultural sector GDP.
G4: Renewable energy investments in
the agricultural sector.
G5: Proportion of climate resilient
households
•	 Medium Term Plans
(MTPs)
•	 CSA interventions
•	 Impact assessments and
surveys
•	 Agriculture sector MRV
reports
•	 Economic survey
reports
•	 Sector reports on
renewable energy
investments
•	 Political will and support
•	 Functional governance and
coordination systems in the sector
•	 Stable macroeconomic environment
for investments
MAJOR OUTCOMES:
Component 1:
Institutional
Coordination:
An inclusive institutional
framework for improved
CSA coordination
and harmonization
established.
C1(a): Functional CSA institutional
coordination mechanisms
C1(b): Proportion of agriculture sector
budget committed to CSA
C1(c): CSA policies and strategies at
both levels of governance
•	 CSA baseline survey and
M&E reports
•	 Sector budgets and
expenditures reports
•	 Agricultural sector partners
willingness to support the
framework
•	 Political and socio-economic stability
is sustained in the country
•	 Capacity on policy development and
implementation available.
Component 2: Agricultural
Productivity and
Integration of Value Chain
Approach:
CSA mainstreamed to
increase productivity,
competitiveness and
commercialization of
agriculture
C2 (a): Outputs: production, products,
yields, and value
C2 (b): Quantity and value of produce
and products marketed
C2 (c): Value chain actors in the
agricultural sector adhering to
market standards
C2 (d):Value chains with comparative
advantage along agro-ecological
zones
•	 CSA baseline survey
•	 M&E reports
•	 Appropriate CSA technologies will be
developed and introduced.
•	 National and county government
policies will support  the emerging
value chain organizations
•	 Changes in market prices of
agricultural inputs and production
energy remain sustainable.
•	 Access to finance for value chain
actors to adopt appropriate CSA
technologies

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
40
NARRATIVE SUMMARY
INDICATORS
MEANS OF VERIFICATION
RISKS AND ASSUMPTIONS
Component 3:
Building resilience and
appropriate mitigation
actions:
Sustainable
management of natural
resource base and
development of safety
nets along value chains
improved.
C3 (a): Proportion of GHGs emissions
sequestered  / abated from
adaptation and mitigation practices
C3 (b): Type of resilience building
actions with mitigation co-benefits
C3 (c): Type of CSA investments
relevant to NRM
C3(d): Type of value chain based safety
nets
•	 Sector MRV reports
•	 CSA baseline survey
•	 M&E reports
•	 All-inclusive selection criteria for
green innovations will be applied.
•	 Political good will to sustainably
implement NRM
Component 4:
Communication systems
on CSA extension and
agro-weather issues:
Communication systems
on CSA, extension and
agro-weather issues
strengthened and
mainstreamed.
C4 (a): Functional CSA, extension and
agro-weather communication
systems
•	 CSA stakeholders
reports
•	 Management
Information Systems
platforms
•	 CSA baseline survey
M&E reports
•	 Relevant institutions and partners
will collaborate in CSA extension and
agro-weather service provision.
•	 Suitable communication systems the
most vulnerable and the poor will be
developed.
OUTCOMES:
Outcome 1: An inclusive institutional framework for improved CSA coordination and harmonization established
Outcome 1.1: Inter-
Ministerial and
County Government
Coordination improved
1.1.1.  Functional Inter-Ministerial
coordination mechanism for CSA
1.1.2.  Functional sector
Intergovernmental Coordination
mechanism that integrates  CSA
1.1.3	 Budget allocation for CSA
coordination mechanism
•	 Sector CSA  reports
•	 Departments in the agricultural
sector at both levels cooperate
•	 Adequate funding for the
coordination mechanism.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 41
NARRATIVE SUMMARY
INDICATORS
MEANS OF VERIFICATION
RISKS AND ASSUMPTIONS
Outcome 1.2:
Partnerships with
private sector and civil
society organizations
strengthened
1.2.1 Engagement platforms with
private and CSOs  in CSA
1.2.2. Proportion of agricultural sector
public, private and CSOs value chain
actors involved in CSA activities
•	 M&E reports
•	 Platform engagement
reports
•	 High participation of the private
sector and / or civil society will result
high impact
•	 Actors willing to share their
resources and information
Outcome 1.3:
Programmatic
Coordination with
Development Partners
strengthened
1.3.1: Joint agricultural sector CSA
programming and financing
mechanism in place
1.3.2. Proportion of development
partners funding CSA
•	 Joint Projects /
Programmes developed
M&E reports
•	 Development partners join
and support agricultural sector
institutions’ CSA  coordination efforts
Outcome 1.4: Research-
Extension Liaison
strengthened
1.4.1: Functional CSA based research –
extension platforms
1.4.2: CSA technologies developed
and packaged for adoption by
agricultural sector value chain
actors
•	 M&E reports
•	 Research-Extension
platforms
•	 Technologies packages
•	 Actors willing to share resources and
information
•	 Technologies developed with end
users in mind
•	 Actors interested in cooperation in
CSA research and extension liaisons
Outcome1.5: Research
funding for CSA
improved
1.5.1: CSA technologies developed
1.5.2: Actors involved in CSA  research
•	 M&E reports
•	 Research publications
•	 Funds released on time for planned
research activities
•	 Actors are willing to undertake CSA
research
Outcome 1.6:
Appropriate CSA
policies, strategies and
regulations reviewed,
developed and rolled
out
1.6.1: Policies, strategies and
regulations relevant to CSA in use at
both levels of governments.
•	 M&E reports
•	 Policies and strategies
documents
•	 Lengthy policy and strategy
development process
Outcome 1.7: CSA data
collection, information
management and
dissemination systems
strengthened
1.7.1: Functional systems for CSA data
and information management
1.7.2: Actors using CSA data and
information management systems.
•	 M&E reports
•	 Feedback report from
users
•	 The system will provide valid and
valuable information for  different
value chain actors
•	 The systems will provide appropriate
CSA information for different
conditions.

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
42
NARRATIVE SUMMARY
INDICATORS
MEANS OF VERIFICATION
RISKS AND ASSUMPTIONS
Outcome 1.8: Capacities
of institutions relevant
to CSA at all levels
strengthened
1.8.1:Sector institutions at national and
county levels delivering on CSA
1.8.2: Sector institutions at national
and county levels with capacities to
deliver CSA.
•	 M&E reports
•	 Sector institutions
reports
•	 Sector institutions will prioritize CSA
•	 Sector institutions will have
resources to undertake CSA
Outcome 2: CSA mainstreamed to increase productivity, competitiveness and commercialization of agriculture
Outcome 2.1: Access
to and use of adaptive
technologies enhanced
2.1.1: Types of adaptive technologies in
use along value chains
2.1.2: Value chain actors using adaptive
technologies
2.1.3: Agricultural enterprises on which
adaptive technologies are applied
•	 M&E reports
•	 Baseline surveys on
adaptive technologies
and agricultural
enterprises
•	 Inventory of appropriate CSA
adaptive technologies.
Outcome 2.2: Area
under efficient irrigation
increased
2.2.1: Proportion of acreage under
efficient and renewable energy
powered irrigation systems
increased
2.2.2: Proportion of producers
undertaking efficient  irrigated
agriculture
•	 Baseline survey
•	 M&E reports
•	 NIB Reports
•	 Farmers and sector stakeholders are
willing to invest in efficient irrigation
infrastructure
Outcome 2.3: New
products developed
and value addition of
commodities enhanced
2.3.1: Types of green agricultural
produce/products
2.3.2: Green  agri-businesses
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 M&E reports
•	 Private sector and other stakeholders
invest in  green growth
•	 Greening agri-businesses will be cost
effective
Outcome 2.4:
Competitiveness and
markets access for
climate smart produce/
products enhanced
2.4.1: Marketed climate smart
commodities
2.4.2: Climate smart  agri-businesses
2.4.3: Actors in  climate smart agri-
business
•	 Market surveys reports
•	 M&E reports
•	 Investors  responds to opportunities
and incentives provided for green
growth
•	 Adequate supporting legislation for
green growth
•	 Adequate capacity for green growth
development will be available

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 43
NARRATIVE SUMMARY
INDICATORS
MEANS OF VERIFICATION
RISKS AND ASSUMPTIONS
Outcome 2.5: Food
and feed storage and
distribution improved
2.5.1: Climate smart food/ feed storage
and distribution technologies in use
2.5.2: Actors using climate smart food
/feed storage and distribution
technologies and practices
•	 Baseline survey
•	 M&E reports
•	 Market surveys reports
•	 Legal framework on food /feed
storage distribution and safety exists
•	 Willingness of the actors to form
linkages
Outcome 3: Sustainable management of natural resource base and development of safety nets along value chains improved
Outcome 3.1: Soil health
improved and degraded
lands rehabilitated
3.1.1: Climate smart soil fertility
management practices
3.1.2: Producers adopting climate
smart soil management practices.
3.1.3: Climate smart soil management
practices up-scaled.
3.1.4: Area of degraded land
rehabilitated
•	 Environmental sector
reports
•	 Baseline survey
•	 M&E reports
•	 Affordable climate smart
technologies are availed
•	 Land tenure systems will support
rehabilitation of degraded lands
•	 Willingness to cooperate by
stakeholders
Outcome 3.2: Water and
other natural resources
conserved
3.2.1: Integrated water resource
management plans
3.2.2: Ecosystem management plans
3.2.3: Area under natural resources
conserved
3.2.4: Number of water harvesting
structures and volume of water
harvested
3.2.5: Public Private Partnerships in
Natural Resources Management
•	 Baseline survey
•	 M&E reports
•	 Grievance solving mechanisms will
be in place
Outcome 3.3: Insurance
and other safety nets
enhanced
3.3.1: Types of index –based insurance
products
3.3.2: Types of safety nets services
3.3.3: Value chain actors using index-
based insurance services
3.3.4: Value chain actors accessing
different safety nets services
•	 Sector reports on
insurance and safety
nets
•	 Baseline survey
•	 M&E reports
•	 Safety nets services will be in place

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
44
NARRATIVE SUMMARY
INDICATORS
MEANS OF VERIFICATION
RISKS AND ASSUMPTIONS
Outcome 3.4: Synergies
in adaptation and
mitigation promoted
3.4.1: Functional GHG accounting
system in place
3.4.2: Climate smart interventions with
adaptation and mitigation benefits
3.4.3: Value chain actors adopting
green interventions with adaptation
and mitigation
•	 Sector reports
•	 Baseline survey
•	 M&E reports
•	 GHG accounting system will be
developed and availed for use.
•	 Value chain actors willingness to
invest in climate smart interventions
Outcome 4:  Communication systems on CSA, extension and agro-weather issues strengthened and mainstreamed
Outcome 4.1: CSA
knowledge generation
and dissemination
enhanced
4.1.1: Institutions generating CSA
knowledge
4.1.2: Information and knowledge
management system
4.1.3:  Service providers disseminating
CSA knowledge
4.1.4: Value chain actors using CSA
information
•	 Institutional reports
•	 Baseline survey
•	 M&E reports
•	 Operational information and
knowledge management system in
place
Outcome 4.2: Extension
on climate information
services and agro-
weather advisories
enhanced
4.2.1: Climate smart information and
agro-weather services and products
4.2.2: Extension service providers
communicating climate smart
information and agro-weather
services
4.2.3: Value chain actors using climate
information smart and agro-
weather services and products
•	 Sector extension reports
•	 Agro-weather and
seasonal planning
reports
•	 Baseline survey
•	 M&E reports
•	 Context specific climate information
is aggregated and timely availed to
users

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 45
NARRATIVE SUMMARY
INDICATORS
MEANS OF VERIFICATION
RISKS AND ASSUMPTIONS
Outcome 1.1: Inter-Ministerial and County Government Coordination improved
Output 1.1.1: A
joint platform for
collaboration between
ministries responsible
for agriculture, livestock,
fisheries, irrigation,
environment, forestry,
water, land, planning,
devolution and finance
established and
strengthened
1.1.1.1 Inter-ministerial, inter-
departmental (MDAs) committees
1.1.1.2 Inter-governmental
coordination mechanism (JCCMAS)
1.1.1.3 Joint sector/intergovernmental
CSA programming mechanism (JAS-
TWGs
•	 Institutions and
departmental reports
•	 Baseline survey
•	 M&E reports
•	 Established mechanism (JCCMAS )
and committees are functional and
stable
Outcome 1.2: Partnerships with private sector and civil society organizations strengthened
Output 1.2.1: A platform
for private sector and
CSOs engagement
with national and
county governments
established and
strengthened
1.2.1.1 Structured framework
for private sector and CSOs
engagement at both levels
1.2.1.2 No. and types of functional CSA
partnerships
•	 Partnership
agreements/ MoUs
•	 Baseline survey
•	 M&E reports
•	 A functional partnership platform
exist
•	 Provide funding for CSA partnership
activities
Outcome 1.3: Programmatic Coordination with Development Partners strengthened
Output 1.3.1:
Coordination and
Collaboration between
National / County
Governments and
Development Partners
strengthened
1.3.1.1: Joint National / County
Governments -Development
Partners on CSA programming
mechanism
1.3.1.2: No. and types of partnerships
between national, counties and
development partners
1.3.1.3: No. of CSA programmes jointly
developed and coordinated
•	 Sector projects /
programmes, reports
•	 Baseline survey
•	 M&E reports
•	 Joint mechanism for coordinating for
CSA programmes

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
46
NARRATIVE SUMMARY
INDICATORS
MEANS OF VERIFICATION
RISKS AND ASSUMPTIONS
Output 1.3.2: Joint
country CSA programme
funding mechanism
established
1.3.2.1: Joint National / County
Governments – Development
Partners CSA program financing
mechanism
1.3.2.2: Amount of funding allocated
to CSA program coordination from
governments and Development
Partner sources
1.3.2.3: No. of Development Partners
jointly funding CSA projects/
programmes
•	 Sector Development
partners reports
•	 Sector projects /
programmes reports
•	 Baseline survey
•	 M&E reports
•	 Prudent utilizations of resources
allocated to CSA projects/
programmes
Outcome 1.4: Research-Extension Liaison framework strengthened
Output 1.4.1: Functional
Research – Extension -
Linkage established
1.4.1.1. Functional climate smart
research extension linkage
mechanism
1.4.1.2. No. and types of functional
climate smart research extension
partnerships at all levels
1.4.1.3. No. and type of CSA
technologies packages
disseminated to actors at all levels
•	 Sector reports
•	 Baseline survey
•	 M&E reports
•	 Operational  CSA Research/Extension
linkages in place
Output 1.4.2: Market-
led CSA adaptive
research and
participatory extension
programmes enhanced
1.4.2.1: No. and types of functional
market-led, adaptive CSA research
along the value chain
1.4.2.2: No. of issues-based CSA
adaptive research
1.4.2.3: No. and types of appropriate
adaptive CSA technological
packages developed
1.4.2.4: No. and type of improved CSA
technologies and practices
•	 Research output reports
•	 Baseline survey
•	 M&E reports
•	 Demand for market-led , issue based
CSA adaptive research

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 47
NARRATIVE SUMMARY
INDICATORS
MEANS OF VERIFICATION
RISKS AND ASSUMPTIONS
Outcome1.5: CSA research funding improved
Output 1.5.1: Research
funding for CSA
innovations increased
1.5.1.1: Proportion of budget of
agricultural sector allocated to CSA
research
1.5.1.2: No. and type of CSA research
innovations  funded by partners
•	 Sector reports
•	 Partner funding  reports
•	 M&E reports
•	 Adequate funding will be availed
for CSA research innovations and
development by partners
Sub-Outcome 1.6: Appropriate CSA policies, strategies and regulations reviewed, developed and rolled out
Output 1.6.1:
Appropriate climate
smart policies, strategies
and regulations
developed, reviewed
and implemented.
1.6.1.1: No and types of CSA polices,
strategies and regulations prepared
and rolled out
1.6.1.2: No and types of CSA
implementation frameworks
developed and in use
•	 Policies, strategies and
regulations documents
•	 M&E reports
•	 Policies, strategies and regulations
passed by relevant authorities at the
national and county levels in good
time.
Outcome 1.7: CSA data collection, information management and dissemination systems strengthened
Output 1.7.1: CSA M&E
system established
1.7.1.1: No of CSA M&E systems
established
1.7.1.2: Functional CSA M&E systems
•	 M&E reports
•	 Harmonizing CSA M&E systems
Output 1.7.2:
CSA information
management systems
strengthened
1.7.2.1: Number of CSA information
and communication systems
1.7.2.2: Type of CSA information and
communication systems in use
•	 Communication strategy
documents
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 M&E reports
•	 Service providers and partners
avail and package climate smart
information
•	 Mechanism for Information security
in place
Outcome 1.8: Capacities of institutions relevant to CSA at all levels strengthened
Output 1.8.1: Capacity
of institutions relevant
to CSA strengthened
1.8.1.1: No. and type of CSA relevant
institutions with improved capacity
•	 M&E reports
•	 Institutions reports
•	 Training reports
•	 Procurement plans and
reports
•	 Stakeholders not adhering to policies
and legislations

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
48
NARRATIVE SUMMARY
INDICATORS
MEANS OF VERIFICATION
RISKS AND ASSUMPTIONS
Outcome 2.1: Access to and use of adaptive technologies enhanced
Output 2.1.1. Adoption
of improved adaptive
technologies for crops
enhanced
2.1.1.1: No. and type of CSA adaptive
technologies for crops in use
2.1.1.2: No. and type of  CSA adaptive
technologies for crops  developed
and piloted
2.1.1.3: No of Public Private
Partnerships involved in promotion
of improved CSA adaptive
technologies for crops.
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 Sectors reports
•	 Research Publications
•	 M&E reports
•	 Adoption of improved adaptive
technologies by value chain actors
•	 Partnerships will be effective
Output 2.1.2. Adoption
of improved adaptive
technologies for
livestock enterprises
enhanced
2.1.2.1: No. and type of improved CSA
adaptive technologies for livestock
enterprises in use
2.1.2.2: No. and type of improved CSA
adaptive technologies developed
and piloted for livestock enterprises
2.1.2.3: No of Public Private
Partnerships involved in
promotion of improved CSA
adaptive technologies for livestock
enterprises
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 Sectors reports
•	 Research publications
•	 M&E reports
Output 2.1.3. Adoption
of improved adaptive
technologies for
capture and culture fish
enhanced
2.1.3.1: No. and type of improved CSA
adaptive fish technologies in use
2.1.3.2: No. and type of improved
CSA adaptive fish technologies
developed and  piloted
2.1.3.3: No. of PPP involved in
promotion of improved CSA
adaptive fish technologies
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 Sectors reports
•	 Research publications
•	 M&E reports
•	 Inclusion of all value chain actors in
piloting and scaling up of improved
adaptive fish technologies

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 49
NARRATIVE SUMMARY
INDICATORS
MEANS OF VERIFICATION
RISKS AND ASSUMPTIONS
Outcome 2.2: Area under efficient irrigation increased
Output 2.2.1: Area
under efficient and
renewable energy
powered irrigation
systems increased
2.2.1.1: Acreage under efficient
and renewable energy powered
irrigation systems
2.2.1.2: No. of farmers using efficient
and renewable energy powered
irrigation systems
•	 Sector reports
•	 Baseline survey
•	 M&E reports
•	 Renewable sources of energy
and technologies are available to
stakeholders
Output 2.2.2:
Application of efficient
water use adaptive
technologies in existing
and new irrigation
systems improved
2.2.2.1: No. and type of appropriate
efficient irrigation technological
packages promoted
2.2.2.1: No. and type of appropriate
efficient irrigation technological
packages in use
2.2.2.3: No. of Water Users’
Associations with capacity
in efficient irrigation water
management
•	 Sector reports
•	 Baseline survey
•	 M&E reports
•	 Private sector, CSOs and county
government’s commit  to promote
and avail water resource-use
efficient adaptive technologies
•	 Capacity to purchase adaptive
irrigation technologies
Outcome 2.3: New products developed and value addition of commodities enhanced
Output 2.3.1:
Development of new
commercially viable
products (crops,
livestock and fisheries)
supported
2.3.1.1: No. and type of CSA value
addition technologies innovated
and piloted
2.3.1.2: No. and type of CSA value
addition technologies in use
2.3.1.3: No. and type of suitable non–
traditional export product
•	 Sector reports
•	 Baseline survey
•	 M&E reports
•	 Value chain actors will support
CSA value addition innovation,
development and commercialization.
Output 2.3.2: Suitable
value chains in each
agro-ecological zone
selected and developed
2.3.2.1: No. and type of suitable pilot
value chains for identified
2.3.2.2: No. and type of actors along
selected suitable value chains
2.3.2.3: No. and type of products from
the selected suitable value chains
•	 Sector reports
•	 Baseline survey
•	 M&E reports
•	 Labeled products
•	 Actors will cooperate in the
development of suitable value chains

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
50
NARRATIVE SUMMARY
INDICATORS
MEANS OF VERIFICATION
RISKS AND ASSUMPTIONS
Outcome 2.4: Competitiveness and markets access for climate smart produce/ products enhanced
Output 2.4.1: Marketed
climate smart
commodities
2.4.1.1: Quantity and value of climate
smart products marketed
2.4.1.2: No. and types of producers
marketing climate smart products
2.4.1.3: No. and types of CSA producers
with functional market linkages
•	 Market survey reports
•	 Marketing contracts
•	 Baseline survey
•	 M&E reports
•	 Market stability
Output 2.4.2: Export
of non-traditional
agricultural commodities
by producers increased
2.4.2.1: Quantity and value of non-
traditional CSA products exported
by producers
2.4.2.2: No. and type of producers
exporting non-traditional CSA
products
2.4.2.3: No. and types of producers
exporting non-traditional CSA
products with functional market
linkages
•	 Market survey reports
•	 Marketing contracts
•	 Baseline survey
•	 M&E reports
•	 Smallholder producers have access
to export markets for non-traditional
CSA products
Output 2.4.3: Grading
and standardization
systems for CSA
commodities developed
2.4.3.1: Functional grading and
standardization systems for CSA
commodities in place
2.4.3.2: No. and type of smallholder
producers adopting grading and
standardization systems
2.4.3.3: Functional CSA commodities
traceability mechanism in place
•	 Grading and
standardization manuals
•	 Traceability guidelines
•	 Market survey reports
•	 Baseline survey
•	 M&E reports
•	 Compliance certificates
•	 Grading and standardization systems
are enforced.
•	 Small scale producers adopt grading
and standardization systems
Outcome 2.5: Food and feed storage and distribution improved
Output 2.5.1: Post
harvest losses along
agricultural value chains
reduced
2.5.1.1: Quantity and value of post-
harvest losses reduction across the
value chain
2.5.1.2: Actors using climate smart
storage facilities and technologies
2.5.1.3: No. and type of climate smart
storage facilities and technologies
in use
•	 Sector reports
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 M&E reports
•	 Availability of climate smart post-
harvest technologies
•	 Value chain actors have skills in post-
harvest technologies

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 51
NARRATIVE SUMMARY
INDICATORS
MEANS OF VERIFICATION
RISKS AND ASSUMPTIONS
Output 2.5.2: Private
sector storage capacity
for agricultural products
enhanced
2.5.2.1: Private sector storage capacity
for agricultural produce/products
2.5.2.2: Type of warehousing receipt
systems in place
2.5.2.3: No. and type of producers
linked to warehousing receipt
system
2.5.2.4: No. and type of warehouse
receipting service providers
2.5.2.5: Proportion of storage facilities
using green energy
•	 Public and private
Sector reports
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 M&E reports
•	 Capacity of private sector to invest in
storage facilities
•	 Availability of climate smart storage
facilities
Output 2.5.3:
Communities and
household capacity
to store agricultural
produce enhanced
2.5.3.1: No. of households sustainably
storing agricultural produce
2.5.3.2: No. and type of communities
adopting climate smart storage
facilities
2.5.3.3: No. and types of climate smart
storage facilities at household and
community level
•	 Sector reports
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 M&E reports
•	 Climate smart storage technologies
are available
Output 2.5.4: Strategic
food reserve expanded
to include appropriate
agricultural products
and strategic feed/
grazing reserves
established
2.5.4.1. Strategic reserve capacity for
climate smart agricultural products
2.5.4.2. Amount and type of strategic
food reserves
2.5.4.3. Amount and type of strategic
feed/grazing reserves
•	 Sector reports
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 M&E reports
•	 Policies on strategic food and
feed reserves developed and
implemented

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
52
NARRATIVE SUMMARY
INDICATORS
MEANS OF VERIFICATION
RISKS AND ASSUMPTIONS
Outcome 3.1: Soil health improved and degraded lands rehabilitated
Output 3.1.1: Climate
smart integrated soil
fertility management
technologies and
practices adopted
3.1.1.1. No. and type of climate
smart integrated soil and water
management technologies in
practice
3.1.1.2. No. of farmers adopting
climate smart integrated soil and
water management technologies
3.1.1.3. No. and type of private sector
service providers on climate
smart integrated soil and water
management technologies
3.1.1.4. No. and type of farmers’
organizations supporting climate
smart integrated soil and water
management technologies
•	 Sector reports
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 M&E reports
•	 Climate smart integrated soil and
water management technologies  are
available
Output 3.1.2:
Sustainable land
management and
rehabilitation of
degraded lands
enhanced
3.1.2.1: Mechanisms for addressing
land management and
rehabilitation of degraded lands
3.1.2.2: No. and type of initiatives
on land management and
rehabilitation of degraded lands
3.1.2.3: Area of degraded land
rehabilitated
•	 Sector reports
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 M&E reports
•	 Willingness and active participation
of stakeholders in land management
and rehabilitation of degraded lands
Outcome 3.2: Water and other natural resources conserved
Output 3.2.1: Water and
other natural resources
conserved
3.2.1.1: No. and type of climate smart
water conservation measures in
place
3.2.1.2: No. and type of climate smart
forests/ecosystem conservation
measures
3.2.1.3: No. and type of value chain
actors adopting climate smart water
and forests/ecosystem conservation
measures
•	 Water resources
management plans
•	 Forest/Ecosystem
management plans
•	 Sector reports
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 M&E reports
•	 Climate smart water and natural
resources conservation technologies
are availed

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 53
NARRATIVE SUMMARY
INDICATORS
MEANS OF VERIFICATION
RISKS AND ASSUMPTIONS
Output 3.2.2:
Integration of climate
smart practices in
conservation and
rehabilitation of water
catchment areas
enhanced
3.2.2.1: Mechanisms for climate smart
integrated  watershed management
3.2.2.2: No. and type of agroforestry
practices integrated in watershed
management plans
3.2.2.3: No. and type of climate
smart soil and water conservation
measures integrated in watershed
management plans
3.2.2.4: No. and type of climate
smart biodiversity conservation
measures integrated in watershed
management plans
3.2.2.4: No. and type of climate smart
PPPs supporting climate smart
integrated watershed management
3.2.2.5: No. and type of climate smart
rangeland management practices
integrated in the watershed
management plans
3.2.2.6: No. and type of business plans
for watershed management plans
3.2.2.7: No. and type of non-traditional
livelihood opportunities linked to
the integrated in the watershed
management plans
•	 Watershed
management plans
•	 Ecosystem management
plans
•	 Sector reports
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 M&E reports
•	 Stakeholders adopt integrate
watershed management plans

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
54
NARRATIVE SUMMARY
INDICATORS
MEANS OF VERIFICATION
RISKS AND ASSUMPTIONS
Output 3.2.3:
Production of
freshwater aquaculture,
marine fisheries
and inland fisheries
from rivers and lakes
increased
3.2.3.1: Quantity of capture fish
produced by type
3.2.3.2: No. and type of value chain
actors practicing climate smart
capture fisheries management
practices
3.2.3.3: No. of fisher folks adopting
climate smart stock and fishing
management practices
3.1.2.4: No. of climate smart fish
breeding sites
•	 Sector reports
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 M&E reports
•	 Availability of climate smart capture
and aquaculture management
technologies
Outcome 3.3: Insurance and other safety nets enhanced
Output 3.3.1: Crop,
livestock and fisheries
innovative index-based
insurance increased
3.3.1.1: No. and type of climate smart
innovative index-based insurance
in use
3.3.1.2: No. and type of actors involved
in provision of climate smart
innovative index-based insurance
3.3.1.3: No. and type of value chain
actors using climate smart
innovative index-based insurance
•	 Sector reports
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 M&E reports
•	 Insurance packages for all value
chain are availed
Output 3.3.2: CSA safety
nets enhanced
3.3.2.1: Mechanism for climate smart
safety nets management
3.3.1.2: No. and type of CSA safety net
services
3.3.1.3: No. and type of actors using
CSA safety net services
•	 Sector reports
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 M&E reports
•	 Stakeholders not adhering to the
safety nets mechanism

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 55
NARRATIVE SUMMARY
INDICATORS
MEANS OF VERIFICATION
RISKS AND ASSUMPTIONS
Outcome 3.4: Synergies in adaptation and mitigation promoted
Output 3.4.1: GHG
emissions intensity
from the agriculture
sector reduced
without compromising
productivity
3.4.1.1: No. and type of adaptive
technologies that minimize GHG
emission and enhance carbon
sequestration
3.4.1.2: No. and type of value chain
actors using adaptive technologies
that minimize GHG emission and
enhance carbon sequestration
•	 Sector MRV reports
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 M&E reports
•	 Availability of carbon accounting
and measurement, reporting and
verification expertise
3.4.1.3: Agriculture sector carbon
accounting and measurement,
reporting and verification system in
place
Output 3.4.2. Resilience
building adaptation
technologies that have
mitigation as co-benefits
promoted
3.4.2.1: No. and type of resilience
building adaptation technologies
with  mitigation as co-benefits
3.4.2..2: No. and type of actors using
resilience building adaptation
technologies that have mitigation
as co-benefits
•	 Sector reports
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 M&E reports
•	 Resilience building technologies
with mitigation as co-benefits are
available.
Outcome 4.1: CSA knowledge generation and dissemination enhanced
Output 4.1.1: CSA
knowledge and
innovations along the
value chain generated
4.1.1.1: No. and type of CSA knowledge
and  innovations generated
4.1.1.2: No. and type of actors
generating CSA knowledge and
innovations
•	 Sector reports
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 Innovation reports
•	 M&E reports
•	 Funds for climate smart agriculture
research will be available.
Output 4.1.2:
CSA knowledge
and information
management systems at
all levels established
4.1.2.1: Functional national, county
and community CSA knowledge and
information management systems
4.1.2.2: No. and type of actors using
CSA knowledge and information
management systems
•	 Sector reports
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 System manuals
•	 KIM  System
•	 M&E reports
•	 National and county policies support
acquisition, storage and sharing of
CSA knowledge and information

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
56
NARRATIVE SUMMARY
INDICATORS
MEANS OF VERIFICATION
RISKS AND ASSUMPTIONS
Output 4.1.3: Best CSA
practices documented,
packaged and
disseminated
4.1.3.1: No. and type of participatory
trials and demos for CSA practices
4.1.3.2: No. and type of CSA practices
documented
4.1.3.3: No. and type of CSA practices
packaged and disseminated
•	 Sector reports
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 Knowledge documents
•	 M&E reports
•	 Existence of strong stakeholder
linkages
Output 4.1.4: CSA
knowledge products
for multimedia and
training produced,
packaged, updated and
communicated
4.1.4.1: No. and type of multimedia
CSA knowledge products
4.1.4.2: No. and type of CSA knowledge
training  packages
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 M&E reports
•	 CSA knowledge
packages
•	 Multimedia and training institutions
will support CSA knowledge
4.1.4.3: No. and type of actors involved
in CSA knowledge products
production, packaging, updating
and communication
Output 4.1.5: CSA
knowledge networks
and partnerships
strengthened
4.1.5.1: Mechanism for strengthening
CSA knowledge and information
sharing
4.1.5.2: Type of CSA information
sharing technology tools
4.1.5.3: No. and type of CSA knowledge
partnerships
4.1.5.4: No. and type of public-private-
partnerships for CSA knowledge
management in place
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 Partnership platforms
•	 M&E reports
•	 Willingness by partners to
collaborate in CSA knowledge and
information sharing

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 57
NARRATIVE SUMMARY
INDICATORS
MEANS OF VERIFICATION
RISKS AND ASSUMPTIONS
Outcome 4.2: Extension on climate information services and agro-weather advisories enhanced
Output 4.2.1: Delivery
of extension services
on climate smart
information and agro-
weather advisories
enhanced
4.2.1.1: Mechanism for downscaling
forecasted weather to various
localities
4.2.1.2: No. and type of appropriate
climate smart weather services and
products
4.2.1.3: Pre-season agro weather
advisories integrated into extension
service systems approaches
4.2.1.4: No. and type of actors using
agro-weather products
4.2.1.5: Monitoring system for in-
season and post-season agro-
weather review
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 Downscaled weather
reports
•	 Agro-weather
advisories
•	 M&E reports
•	 Availability of precise  downscaled
weather information
Output 4.2.2: Early
warning systems and
contingency plans for
climate change response
strengthened
4.2.2.1: Functional early warning
systems
4.2.2.2: No. of functional contingency
plans
4.2.2.3: Efficient mechanisms for
disseminating early warning
information
4.2.2.4: Number and type of value
chain actors using early warning
information
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 Early warning
documents
•	 M&E reports
•	 Actors will invest in early warning
systems

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
58
NARRATIVE SUMMARY
INDICATORS
MEANS OF VERIFICATION
RISKS AND ASSUMPTIONS
Output 4.2.3: Disaster
and climate risk
preparedness and
mitigation practices for
the most vulnerable
livelihood identified and
disseminated
4.2.3.1: No. and type of disaster and
climate risk preparedness and
mitigation practices for the most
vulnerable livelihood
4.2.3.2: No. and type of most
vulnerable groups adopting disaster
and climate risk preparedness and
mitigation practices
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 Sector reports
•	 M&E reports
•	 Stakeholders to prioritize the most
vulnerable groupings
Output 4.2.4: Adoption
of improved CSA
technologies and
practices by value chain
enhanced
4.2.4.1: No. and type of improved CSA
technologies and practices
4.2.4.2: No. and type of value chain
actors adopting improved CSA
technologies and practices
•	 Baseline surveys
•	 M&E reports
•	 Sector reports
•	 Affordability of CSA technologies and
practices

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 59
Component/Sub-component
2018-
2022
2023-
2027
Total Budget
(Billions KSh.)
1.0 Institutional Coordination
1.1:Inter-Ministerial and County Government Coordination
1.84
1.84
3.68
1.2:Partnerships with private sector and civil society organizations
1.84
1.84
3.68
1.3:Programmatic Coordination with Development Partners
1.84
1.84
3.68
1.4: Research-Extension Liaison framework
1.84
1.84
3.68
1.5: CSA research funding improved
1.84
1.84
3.68
1.6:Appropriate CSA policies, strategies and regulations reviewed,
prepared and rolled out
1.84
1.84
3.68
1.7:CSA data collection, information management and
dissemination systems supported
1.84
1.84
3.68
1.8:Capacities for institutions relevant to CSA at all levels
strengthened
1.84
1.84
3.68
Sub-total
14.72
14.72
29.44
2.0 Agricultural Productivity and Socially Inclusive Value Chain Integration
2.1:Access to and use of adaptive technologies enhanced
5.52
5.52
11.04
2.2:Area under efficient irrigation increased
3.68
3.68
7.36
2.3:New products developed and  value addition of commodities
enhanced
3.68
4.91
8.59
2.4:Competitiveness  and markets access for climate smart
produce/ products enhanced
5.52
5.52
11.04
2.5:Food and feed storage and distribution improved
7.36
7.36
14.72
Sub-total
25.76
26.99
52.75
3.0  Enhancing Resilience and Associated Mitigation Co-benefits
3.1:Soil health improved and degraded lands rehabilitated
3.68
3.68
7.36
3.2:Water and other natural resources conserved
5.52
5.52
11.04
3.3:Insurance and other safety nets enhanced
3.68
3.68
7.36
3.4:Synergies in adaptation and mitigation enhanced
1.84
1.84
3.68
Sub-total
14.72
14.72
29.44
4.0 Communication Systems on CSA Extension and Agro-weather issues strengthened and
mainstreamed
4.1: CSA knowledge generated and disseminated
11.04
11.04
22.08
4.2: Extension on climate info services and agro-weather advisories
enhanced
9.20
9.20
18.40
Sub-total
20.24
20.24
40.48
5.0 Monitoring & Evaluation                                        Sub-total
7.60
7.60
15.20
TOTAL
83.04
84.27
167.31
Annex 2:
Ten year KCSAIF investment plan and budget (2018-2027)

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
60
Annex 3:
Team of Experts involved in development of the KCSAIF 2018-2027
NAME
ORGANIZATION
EMAIL ADDRESS
1.
Dr. Michael Obora
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and
Fisheries, State Department of Agriculture
michaelobora@yahoo.com
2.
Robin Mbae
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and
Fisheries, State Department of Livestock
robinmbae@yahoo.com
3.
Dr. Lucy Ng’ang’a
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and
Fisheries, State Department of Agriculture
Lucynganga09@gmail.com
4.
Veronica Ndetu
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and
Fisheries, State Department of Agriculture
vndetu@yahoo.com
5.
Zipora Otieno
Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations
Zipora.Otieno@fao.org
6.
Rose Akombo
Kenya Forest Service
rakombo@gmail.com
7.
Vincent Ogwang’
Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation, State
Department of Fisheries
viodog2000@yahoo.com
8.
Benjamin Kibor
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and
Fisheries, State Department of Livestock
Bkibor2001@yahoo.com
9.
Davies Makilla
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and
Fisheries, State Department of Fisheries
dmukwabi@gmail.com
10.
Maurice Ouma
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and
Fisheries, State Department of Livestock
onyiouma@gmail.com
11
Dr. Michael Okoti
Kenya Agricultural  and Livestock Research
Organisation
michael.okoti@kalro.org
12.
Dr. James Kinyangi
Climate Change and Food Security, East Africa
j.kinyangi@cgiar.org
13.
Dr. George Wamukoya
Common Market for Eastern and Southern
Africa
wamukoyageorge@gmail.com
14.
Michael Okumu
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and
Fisheries, State Department of Agriculture
ochiengokumu@gmail.com
15.
Lucy Kamande
Ministry of Environment and Natural
Resources
lkmumbi@ymail.com
16.
Joab Osumba
DAI/MATRIX/IISD Consortium of the United
Kingdom Department for International
Development
jl.osumba@ficcf.com
17.
Maurice Otieno
National Environment Management Authority
mnyunja@gmail.com
18.
Joseph Muhwanga
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and
Fisheries, State Department of Livestock
muhwanga@yahoo.com
19.
Janet Oyuke
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and
Fisheries, State Department of Agriculture
achiengoyuke@yahoo.com
20.
Mary Githinji
Kenya Meteorological Service
mary4mu@yahoo.com
21.
Dr. Samwuel Guto
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and
Fisheries, State Department of Agriculture
snyachio@gmail.com
22.
Mary Mwanzau
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and
Fisheries, State Department of Agriculture
mmwanzau@yahoo.com
23.
Dr. Beatrice Akunga
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and
Fisheries, State Department of Fisheries
bghettuba@yahoo.com

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 61
Annex 4:
List of participants of the National Consultative Workshop held at the
Laico Regency Hotel, Nairobi on 28th May 2015
NAME
ORGANIZATION
EMAIL ADDRESS
1.
Prof. Micheni S. Ntiba
MOALF-SDF
PS Fisheries
2.
Julius Kiptarus
MOALF-SDL
jkiprarus@yahoo.co.uk
3.
Vincent Ogwang’
MOALF-CCU
viodog2000@yahoo.com
4.
Jacob Agoch
FICCF
jacob.agoch@ficcf.com
5.
John Ndungu
FICCF
john.Ndungu@ficcf.com
6.
Sylvester Kiai
KWIA
info@kwia.co.ke
7.
Lucy Kamande
MEWNR
lkmumbi@yahoo.com
8.
Mary Mwanzau
MOALF
mmwanzau@yahoo.com
9.
Zainabu Khalif
UNDP
zeinabu.khalif@undp.or
10.
Fiona Percy
CARE
fiona@careclimatechange.org
11
Mary M. Githinji
KMS
mary4mu@yahoo.com
12.
Joseph Muhwanga
MOALF
nygwabge@yahoo.com
13.
Christopher Baker
FAO HQ
chrisfbaker@btintemet.com
14.
Janet Oyuke
MOALF
achiengoyuke@yahoo.com
15.
Michael Okumu
MOALF
ochiengokumu@gmail.com
16.
Dr. Dorothy A. Amwata
SEKU
damwata@seku.ac.ke
17.
Nyachomba Kariuki
LTS Africa
nyachomba-kariuki@ltsi.co.uk
18.
Hon. Patrick Koyi
Bungoma County
partrick.nabiswa@yahoo.com
19.
Hon. Luka Rotich
Baringo County
cecagriculturebaringo@gmail.com
20.
Benjamin Mutua
Consumer action
nziokibm@hotmail.com,
benjamin.mutue@consumeraction.co.ke
21.
Richard Mwendandu
MEWNR
ri_mwendadu@yahoo.com
22.
Brian Harding
SNV
bha-ding@snvworld.org
23.
Dr. James Kinyangi
CCAFS HRI
J.kinyangi@cgiar.org
24.
Emma Bowa
CARE Kenya
emmabowa@vare.or.ke
25.
Richard B. Bwogo
Narok County
rbwogo@gmail.com
26.
Dr. Beatrice Akunga
MOALF
bgwehuba@yahoo.com
27.
Eng. Jasper Nkanya
MOALF
nkenya2000@yahoo.au
28.
Nina Lande
FAO
nina.lande@fao.org
29.
Barrack Okoba
FAO
barrack.oluba@fao.org
30.
H.M. Macharia
Twiga Chemicals
macharia@twigachemicals.com
31.
Apollo Kiarii
KTGA
apollo.kiarii@ktga.or.ke
32.
M. N. Otieno
NEMA
mnyungel@gmail.com
33.
Michael Kibebe
Agri-Experience
mike@agri-experience.com
34.
Wesley Laprop
Baringo County
kiproploribo@yahoo.com
35.
Lily N. Githinji
AWAN Kenya
lilyblessings@yahoo.co.uk

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
62
NAME
ORGANIZATION
EMAIL ADDRESS
36.
Caitlin Corner-Dolloff
CIAT/CCAFS
c.corner-dolloff@ccap.ope
37.
Benard Nyahubega
KFC
kfc@kenyaflowerconsul.org
38.
Hon. Halima Abdi
Vihiga County
halimasirongo@yahoo.com.uk
39.
Stephen Otieno
GIZ
stephen.otieno@giz.de
40.
Rebbie Harawa
AGRA
rhawa@gra.org
41.
Torben Lundsgaard
GIZ
lundsgaaaaard@anbbro.de
42.
Nadine Gbossa
IFA
n.obossa@ifad.org
43.
Wanjiku Kimamo
KMT
wakimamo@kenyamarkets.org
44.
Lawrence Kiguro
World Vision
lawrence.kiguro@wol.org
45.
Julius Okara
KEPSA
okarajuli@ych
46.
Mary Njoroge
World Bank
mnjoroge@worldbank.org
47.
Edward K. Mudibo
Agricultural Industry Network
eumudibo@yahoo.com
48.
E. Wambu Miano
Kirinyaga County
wambumiano@gmail.com
49.
Nancy Chege
UNDP-GEF/SGP
Nancy.chege@undp.org
50.
Hon. E. Layad
Bomet County
layateci@yahoo.com
51.
John Njenga
Kiambu County
Jngenga726@yahoo.com
52.
Enock Kanyanya
USAID/Kenya
ekanyanya@usaid.org
53.
Anastasia Mbatia
Bomet County
Anastasia@agriexperince.com
54.
Richard Koech
Bomet County
rkoech200@yahoo.com
55.
Hellen Buthendu
KENAFF
hguhendu@gmail.com,
nduati@nelleon.co.ke
56.
Christine Otieno
KENOG
otienochristine@yahoo.com
57.
Charles Mwai
Capacity Africa
Charles-mwai@yahoo.com
58.
Ouma Maurice
MOALF
onyiouma@gmail.com
59.
Rose Manyu
CCAFS
r.manyu@cgiar.org
60.
Deborah Murphy
StARCK
Deborah.murphy@ficcf.com
61.
Joab Osumba
FICCF
jl.osumba@ficcf.com

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 63
Annex 5:
List of participants of the National Validation Workshop held at Silver
Springs Hotel, Nairobi on 30th June, 2015
NAME
ORGANIZATION
EMAIL ADDRESS
1.
Prof. Micheni Ntiba
MOALF-SDF
PS Fisheries
2.
Prof. Fred Segor
MOALF-SDL
PS Livestock
3.
Dr. Richard Lesiyampe
MEW&NR
PS Environment
4.
Prof. S.O. Wandiga
ICCA-UoN
wandigas@uonbi.ac.ke
5.
Dr. Michael Obora
MOALF-SDA
michaelobora@yahoo.com
6.
Robin Mbae
MOALF-SDL
robinmbae@yahoo.com
7.
Dr. George Wamukoya
COMESA
GWamukoya@comesa.int
8.
Dr. James Kinyangi
CCAFS
J.Kinyangi@cgiar.org
9.
Joab Osumba
FICCF (DFID)
jl.osumba@ficcf.com
10.
Rose Manyu
CCAFS
r.manyu@cgiar.org
11
Vivian Atakos
CCAFS
v.atakos@cgiar.org
12.
Dr. Justus Ochieng
Tegemeo Institute
justus@tegemeo.org
13.
H.M. Macharia
Twiga Chemicals
macharia@twiga-chem.com
14.
Richard Mbithi
Miti Mingi CC
mitimcc@gmail.com
15.
Patrick Brandt
ILRI
16.
Rose Akombo
Kenya Forest Service
rakombo@gmail.com
17.
Chikakula Miti
COMESA
cmiti@comesa.int
18.
Mary Githinji
Kenya Met Service
mary4mu@yahoo.com
19.
Dr. Charles Mutai
MEW&NR
drcmutai@gmail.com
20.
Dr. Evan Girvetz
CIAT
girvetz@gmail.com
21.
Lucy Kamande
MEW&NR
lkmumbi@ymail.com
22.
Jack Juma
KOAN
kajuma@koan.co.ke
23.
Noelle O'Brien
FICCF (DFID)
noelle.obrien@ficcf.com
24.
Wanjiru Kamau
KOAN
wanjiruk@koan.co.ke
25.
Dr. Bashir Jama
AGRA
BJama@agra.org
26.
Caroline Lentupuru
Baringo, Government of
cecagriculturebaringo@gmail.com
27.
Margaret Kamau
CDKN
margaret.kamau@cdkn.org
28.
David Aoll
Magadi Soda
29.
Greg Maketh
MoLTD
30.
Peter Githinji
East African Grain Council
pgithinji@eagc.org
31.
Ouma Maurice
MOALF-SDL
onyiouma@gmail.com
32.
Torben Lundsgaard
GIZ-CC
lundsgaard@ambero.de
33.
Johnstone Mulary
Kenya Power Council
jmulary@kenyapowercouncil.org
34.
Deborah Murphy
StARCK+TA (DFID)
Deborah.Murphy@ficcf.com
35.
Saidi Mkomwa
ACT
saidi.komwa@act-africa.org
36.
Dr. Todd Rosentock
ICRAF
T.Rosenstock@cgiar.org
37.
Charles Magige
SDF
c.magige@yahoo.com

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
64
NAME
ORGANIZATION
EMAIL ADDRESS
38.
Dr. G. Njoroge
KCA
gnjoroge@yahoo.com
39.
D. L. Maingi
Agricultural Association of Kenya
dlmaingi@yahoo.com
40.
Emma Bowa
CARE Kenya
emmabowa@care.or.ke
41.
Japheth Kanda
Kenya Airports Authority
jeffkkanda@yahoo.com
42.
Elizabeth Mwangi
County Government of Laikipia
elizabethmwangi@gmail.com
43.
Kim Mhando
East African Grain Council
kmhando@eaagc.org
44.
Lawrence Kiguro
World Vision
lawrence_kiguro@wvi.org
45.
Janet Oyuke
MOALF-SDA
achiengoyuke@yahoo.com
46.
Joseph Muhwanga
MOALF-SDL
muhwanga@yahoo.com
47.
Catherine Mungai
CCAFS
C.Mungai@cgiar.org
48.
Stephen Otieno
GIZ
stephen.otieno@giz.de
49.
Apollo Kiarii
KTGA
apollo.kiarii@ktga.or.ke
50.
Mariana Rufino
CIFOR
M.Rufino@cgiar.org
51.
Ceciwa Banda
COMESA
csifima@comesa.int
52.
Brian Otiende
East African Community
botiende@eachq.org
53.
Dr. Peter Mokaya
OCA
mokayapm@gmail.com
54.
Prof. B. Mochoge
KU
benson.mochoge@gmail.com
55.
John Ndungu Wairore
FICCF (DFID)
jwairore@gmail.com
56.
Doreen J. Chirchir
FICCF (DFID)
Doreen.Chirchir@ficcf.com
Annex 6:
Team of Experts that finalised  KCSAIF
NAME
ORGANIZATION
EMAIL ADDRESS
1.
Dr. Lucy Ng’ang’a
MOA&I-CCU
Lucynganga09@gmail.com
2.
Robin Mbae
MOA&I-CCU
robinmbae@yahoo.com
3.
Veronica Ndetu
MOA&I-CCU
vndetu@yahoo.com
4.
Rose Akombo
KFS - M E & F
rakombo@gmail.com
5.
Vincent Ogwang’
MOA&I-CCU
viodog2000@yahoo.com
6.
Davies Makilla
MOA&I-CCU
dmukwabi@gmail.com
7.
Benjamin Kibor
MOA&I-CCU
Bkibor2001@yahoo.com
8.
Frashiah W. Mwebia
MOA&I-CCU
wangecikiarie@gmail.com
9.
Zipora Otieno
FAO
Zipora.otieno@fao.org

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 65
Annex 7:
Lists of participants in County consultations
List of Participants in County Consultations: Venue Kitui – 8th to 12th June 2016 (Lamu,
Wajir, Mandera, Tana River, Garissa Counties)
NAME
ORGANIZATION/ DUTY STATION
1.
Yussuf A. Noor
Garrisa County – Irrigation Dept
2.
Jelle A. Ibrahim
County Director of Agriculture – Garissa
3.
Aboladip A. Haret
Ass Director Environment – Garissa
4.
Michael Okumu
MENR – CCD
5.
Nzioka Wambua
Tana River – Livestock
6.
Thomas N. P. Mugo
Livestock & Fisheries – Tana River
7.
Allan G. Vidonyi
Agriculture – Lamu
8.
Macharia W. B.
Agriculture – Lamu
9.
Jackson Afundi
KMD – Lamu
10.
DrCharles  Mutange
Veterinary – Lamu
11.
Abdinoor I. Musa
DALF – Water
12.
Kamwenji Simon
DCFO – WAJIR
13.
Rose Wambui
NEMA – WAJIR
14.
Nyandoro Josiah
DCO NEMA - Mandera
15.
Benard Ogutu
County Director of Agriculture - Mandera
16.
Mohamed Aden
County Director - Fisheries
17.
Rose Akombo
MENR – KFS
18.
Vincent Ogwang
MoALF – SDF
19.
Hassan M. Adan
Agriculture – wajir
20.
Daud Yakub Guliye
DALF – Wajir
21.
Kamalu Sharrif
County Director Fisheries – Lamu
22.
Fredrick Oloo
Min of Agric, Liv & Fisheries - NAIROBI
23.
Joab Osumba
FICC / DFID
24.
Michael Obora
MoALF – CCU – NAIROBI
25.
Davies Makilla
MOALF- CCU
26.
Benjamin Kibor
MOALF - CCU

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
66
List of Participants in County Consultations: Venue Mombasa 25th – 27th July, 2016
(Mombasa, Kwale, Machakos, Taita Taveta and Kitui Counties)
No.
Name
Mobile No/Email Address
Institution
1.
Uzel Mzera
Uzelmzera@yahoo.com
MoALF
2.
David Wajala
cdakwale@gmail.com
County
3.
Nyaga C.Nkurui
nyagachristopher@yahoo.com
County
4.
Gor Kenneth
cdlmachakos@yahoo.com
County
5.
Wanderi livingstone
wanderiw@gmail.com
Livestock
6.
Juma Rissas
sclpoluugaluga@yahoo.com
Livestock
7.
Japheth Musila
musilajapheth@gmail.com
Fisheries
8.
Francis N.Kitoo
franckitoo@yahoo.com
Agriculture
9.
Chege Kanyuamiti
dvokilungu@yahoo.com
Livestock
10.
Paul Munyau Kaleve
mukalove@yahoo.com
Irrigation
11
Jonathan Mwanya
mingla@yahoo.com
MoA
12.
Aggrey Ogolla
ogallo@yahoo.com
Fisheries
13.
Omondi A. Okiri
cakorio@gmail.com
Fisheries
14.
Benjamin J. Kibor
bkibor@yahoo.com
MoALF/SDL
15.
Robin Mbae
robinmbae@yahoo.com
MoALF/SDL
16.
Joan Mwangi
Joan.mwangi@fao.org
FAO
17.
Musembi
Musembic@yahoo.com
MoALF
18.
Lucy Nganga
Lucynganga09@gmail.com
MoALF CCU
19.
Gideon Wambua
gideonmuli@yahoo.com
MoALF
20.
Margaret Jefwa
cdariculturekilifi@gmail.com
Agriculture
21.
Mulu kitari
smkituri@gmail.com
Livestock
22.
Rose Akombo
rakombo@gmail.com
Kenya Forest Service
23.
Vincent Onwang
viodog200@yahoo.com
MoALF
24.
Dr. Peter Gathayo
dvomulitu@gmail.com
Livestock
25.
Kimani John M.
markkimanij@yahoo.com
MoALF
26.
Michael Ochieng
ochiengma@yahoo.com
ASDSP
27.
Davd K. Beti
bettdkafe@gmail.com
Fisheries
28.
Veronica Ndetu
vndetu@yahoo.com
MoALF
29.
Hamisi mwakibarua
irrigationmsa@yahoo.com
Irrigation
30.
Joab Osumba
jlesumba@mail.com
Consultant
31.
Michael Obora
michaelobora@yahoo.com
CCU/MoALF
32.
Doris N. Kiia
taitatavetacda@yahoo.com
Agriculture
33.
Stanly K. Nuguti
smnuguti@gmail.com
MoALF
34.
Daniel Imunya
danielimunya@gmail.com
MoALF
35.
Davies Makilla
dmkwabi@gmail.com
MoALF

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 67
List of Participants in County Consultations: Venue Kitale 23rd – 27th January, 2017
(Turukana, Bungoma, West Pokot, Trans Nzoia, Uasin Gishu, Kakamega, Busia, Elgeyo
Marakwet Counties)
No.
Name
Institution/County
Job Title
1.
Robin Mbae
MOALF-CCU
Deputy Director
2.
Joab Osumba
FICCP(DFID)
Consultant
3.
Rose Akombo
MENR-KFS
Assistant Director
4.
Michael Okumu
MENR-CCD
SAD-CCNF
5.
Veronica Ndetu
MOALF-CCU
Principal Agricultural Officer
6.
Robert Kibunja
Fisheries- Turkana
County Director Fisheries
7.
Davies Makilla
MOALF-CCU
Senior Fisheries officer
8.
Vincent Ogwang
MOALF-CCU
Principal Fisheries officer
9.
Omar Boru Aga
Fisheries- Turkana
Senior Fisheries officer
10.
Fredrick Aloo
MOALF-SDL
Assistant Director
11
Francis Okoyo Anunda
Livestock- Kakamega
County Director Livestock
12.
Fredrick Wotia
Agriculture- Bungoma
County Director Agriculture
13.
Samson K. Kunyu
Livestock- Bungoma
County Director Livestock
14.
Joab Olilah Okoto
Fisheries- Bungoma
County Director Fisheries
15.
Evelyn Koskei
Agriculture Irrigation- West Pokot
County Director Agriculture
16.
Barasa Mumbe
Livestock- Trans Nzoia
County Director Livestock
17.
Patrick Wateyi
Agriculture- Trans Nzoia
Senior Superintendent (Agri.)
18.
Samson Kosgei
Fisheries- West Pokot
County Director Fisheries
19.
Janeth Chepng’etich
Agriculture- Uasin Gishu
County Agriculture Engineer
20.
Fredrick Kangogo
E.M.C Elgeyo Marakwet
County Director Fisheries
21.
Peter Chepkwony
Elgeyo Marakwet
County Director Livestock
22.
Peter Isigi
Agriculture-Elgeyo Marakwet
County Crops Officer
23.
Elia Lolem
Livestock-Turkana
County Livestock Officer
24.
Thoma Elim
Livestock-Turkana
County Veterinary Officer
25.
Kevin W. Adwera
MALF-Busia
Fisheries Assistant
26.
Joseph K. Chelulei
Environment-Uasin Gishu
County Director Environment
27.
Frank Moturi
MOALF-Busia Agriculture
County Crops Officer
28.
Abraham K. Kiptanui
MALF- Uasin Gishu County
County Livestock Production
29.
Joseph Imbira
Agriculture-Kakamega
County Director Agriculture
30.
Zablon Shilenge
Environment- Kakamega
County Director Environment
31.
Ismael Oduor
Irrigation - Kakamega
County Director Irrigation
32.
Cosmas K. Langat
Fisheries- Uasin Gishu
Senior Fisheries Officer
33.
Godfrey S. Walasa
Environment- Trans Nzoia
Director Environment
34.
Lawrence O. Oigoro
Agriculture- Turkana
Director Agriculture
35.
Josia Kirwa
Irrigation -Turkana
Irrigation Officer
36.
Stanley K. Mutai
Veterinary West Pokot
Chief Veterinary Officer
37.
Paul Lolchongar
Livestock West Pokot
County Director Livestock
38.
Daniel Rono
MALF
Driver
39.
Kenneth Kagai
Agriculture – Trans Nzoia
Principal Agricultural Officer

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
68
List of Participants in County Consultations at Kisumu Venue– 30th January to 2nd February
2017 (Nandi, Kericho, Vihiga, Siaya, Kisumu, Homa Bay, Migori, Kisii, Nyamira Counties)
No.
Name
Institution/County
Job Title
1.
Robin Mbae
MALF-CCU
Deputy Director
2.
Veronica Ndetu
MALF-CCU
Principal Agricultural Officer
3.
Davies Makilla
MALF-CCU
Senior Fisheries Officer
4.
Vincent Ogwang
MALF-CCU
Principal Fisheries Officer
5.
Fredrick Aloo
MALF-SDL
Assistant Director
6.
Rose Akombo
MENR-KFS
Assistant Director
7.
Michael Okumu
MENR-CCD
Senior Assistant Director
8.
Daniel Rono
MALF-SDA
Driver
9.
Joab Osumba
FICCP(DFiD)
Consultant
10.
Simon Mutai
Agriculture- Nandi
Deputy Director
11
David Kemboi
Fisheries-Nandi
Director
12.
Lord Mise
Livestock- Nandi
Director
13.
Odoyo Bittar
Agriculture- Kericho
Agricultural Engineer
14.
Daudi Kitur
Environment- Kericho
Director
15.
Johnstone K. Rono
Agriculture-Kericho
Director
16.
Charles K. Kirui
Fisheries-Kericho
Deputy Director
17.
David Tonui
Livestock-Kericho
Director
18.
Alice A. Kafwa
Agriculture-Vihiga
Director
19.
Stephen Njau
Fisheries- Vihiga
Director
20.
Richard Ndiwa
Livestock- Vihiga
Director
21.
Robert Oduor
Water-Vihiga
Deputy Sub-County
22.
Zachariah J. Bolo
Fisheries- Siaya
Director
23.
Isaac Munyendo
Agriculture-Siaya
Director
24.
Pitalis Owenga
Water and Irrigation-Siaya
Irrigation Engineer
25.
Maurice Obiero
Livestock- Siaya
Director
26.
Alfred O. Ajulu
Livestock- Kisumu
Director
27.
Sylvester Oketch
Agriculture- Kisumu
Director
28.
Joram Rasto
Fisheries- Kisumu
Director
29.
Ernest Matengo
Irrigation- Kisumu
Irrigation Engineer
30.
Philips Agwanda
Fisheries- Homa Bay
Director
31.
Tabitha A. Ajuang
Agriculture-Homa Bay
Director
32.
Ben Odhiambo
Livestock-Homa Bay
Director
33.
Paul Peter
Irrigation- Homa Bay
Director
34.
Monique Atieno
Livestock- Migori
Director
35.
Francisca Katile
Agriculture- Migori
Director
36.
Judith Okinda
Fisheries- Migori
Director
37.
Tom A. Misenya
Environment-Migori
Director
38.
Joshua O. Opar
Irrigation-Migori
County Irrigation Officer

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 69
No.
Name
Institution/County
Job Title
39.
Shem J. Kambogo
Agricultural Engineering-Migori
Agricultural Engineer
40.
Jerald G. Kibathi
Environment-Migori
Environment officer
41.
Alexander O. Obwocha
Environment-Kisii
Director
42.
John Ndege
Livestock-Kisii
Director
43.
Edwin R. Muga
Fisheries- Kisii
Director
44.
Nicholas Ondimu
Agricultural Engineering -Kisii
Director
45.
Kennedy Maseno
Agriculture-Kisii
Deputy Director
46.
Naphtaly Odhoch
Meteorology - Nyamira
Director
47.
Michael  Lochampa
Livestock-Nyamira
Animal Production
48.
David Munyi
Agriculture-Nyamira
Director
49.
Philip K. Ruto
Fisheries- Nyamira
Director
50.
Oliver Agado
Irrigation- Nyamira
Irrigation Engineer
List of Participants at Embu Venue – 20th to 23rd March 2017 (Nairobi, Marsabit, Kirinyaga,
Meru, Isiolo, Samburu, Tharaka Nithi, Muranga, Nyeri, Samburu Counties)
No.
Name
Institution/County
Job Title
1.
Walter Mugambi
Agriculture-Tharaka Nithi
County Chief Officer
2.
Robin Mbae
MALF-CCU
Deputy Director
3.
Veronica Ndetu
MALF-CCU
Principal Agricultural Officer
4.
Davies Makilla
MALF-CCU
Senior Fisheries Officer
5.
Lucy Ng’ang’a
MALF-CCU
Chief Agricultural Officer
6.
Rose Akombo
MENR-KFS
Assistant Director
7.
Benjamin Kibor
MALF-CCU
Principal Livestock Production
8.
Peter Karani
MALF-SDA
Driver
9.
Joab Osumba
FICCP(DFiD)
Consultant
10.
Zipora Otieno
FAO-KE
Technical Coordinator
11
Phylis Obayo
FAO-KE
Operations Assistant
12.
James Gakuo
Fisheries-Nyeri
Principal Fisheries Officer
13.
Eric Wetende
Livestock-Nairobi City
Assistant Director
14.
Jared Bogita
Fisheries-Marsabit
Assistant Director
15.
Julius Gitu
Agriculture-Marsabit
Director
16.
Moses Lengarite
Livestock-Marsabit
Director
17.
Ephraim Nderu
Livestock-Kirinyaga
Senior Assistant Director
18.
Ann Kimotho
Fisheries-Kirinyaga
Assistant Director
19.
Raymond Ng’etich
Fisheries-Meru
Senior Fisheries Officer
20.
Felix Muthomi
Fisheries-Isiolo
Assistant Director
21.
Njeru Ndwiga
Agriculture-Samburu
Principal Agricultural Officer
22.
Simon Lepakiyo
Fisheries- Samburu
Fisheries Officer
23.
Stephen Gichunge
Fisheries-Tharaka Nithi
Assistant Director

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
70
No.
Name
Institution/County
Job Title
24.
Joseph Ngari
Agriculture-Isiolo
Assistant Director
25.
Rachel Kamau
Fisheries-Nairobi City
Principal Fisheries Officer
26.
Peter Nyamora
Livestock-Murang’a
Senior Assistant Director
27.
Dr. Lucy Kareithi
Livestock-Tharaka Nithi
Assistant Director
28.
Elizabeth Njau
Agriculture-Nairobi City
Principal Agricultural Officer
29.
John Rauni
Fisheries-Murang’a
Principal Fisheries Officer
30.
Ruth Mwangi
Livestock-Nyeri
Deputy Director
31.
Ephantus Mwangi
Agriculture-Nyeri
Deputy Director
32.
Judith Katumo
Agriculture-Samburu
Principal
33.
Benson Muriithi
Agriculture-Kirinyaga
Deputy Director
34.
David Mululu
Agriculture-Tharaka Nithi
Assistant Director
35.
Dr. Joseph Muriira
Veterinary-Isiolo
Assistant Director
36.
Ibrahim Hassan
Environment-Marsabit
Environment Officer
37.
Evans Mwiti
Livestock-Meru
Chief Livestock Production
38.
Murigi Kahiu
Agriculture-Murang’a
Chief Agricultural Officer
List of Participants in County Consultations: Venue Naivasha 27th - 30th March 2017
(Nyandarua, Baringo, Bomet, Laikipia, Kajiado, Kiambu, Embu, Narok and Nakuru Counties)
No.
Name
Institution/County
Job Title
1.
Veronica Ndetu
MALF-CCU
Principal Agricultural Officer
2.
Davies Makilla
MALF-CCU
Senior Fisheries Officer
3.
Rose Akombo
MENR-KFS
Assistant Director
4.
Benjamin Kibor
MALF-CCU
Principal Livestock Production
5.
Peter Karani
MALF-SDA
Driver
6.
Joab Osumba
FICCP(DFiD)
Consultant
7.
Zipora Otieno
FAO-KE
Technical Coordinator
8.
Phylis Obayo
FAO-KE
Operations Assistant
9.
Lucy Ng’ang’a
MALF-CCU
Chief Agricultural Officer
10.
Irene Wambugu
Livestock -Nyandarua
Principal Livestock Production
11
Richard Bundotich
Livestock-Baringo
Assistant Director
12.
Joel Maina
Agriculture-Baringo
Assistant Director
13.
Patrick Too
Agriculture-Bomet
Director
14.
Felix Lagat
Fisheries-Bomet
Director
15.
Dickson Ogwai
Fisheries-Baringo
Director
16.
Dr. Daniel Ndung’u
Livestock-Laikipia
Director
17.
Jamin Rutto
Agriculture-Narok
Chief Agricultural Officer
18.
Elizabeth Mwangi
Agriculture-Laikipia
Director
19.
Peterson Njue
Fisheries-Laikipia
Director
20.
Silvester Karinge
Irrigation-Nyandarua
Chief Irrigation Officer

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE 71
No.
Name
Institution/County
Job Title
21.
Daniel Nyagaka
Agriculture-Kajiado
Assistant Director
22.
Benson Siangot
Fisheries-Kajiado
Senior Assistant Officer
23.
Duncan Swiwa
Livestock-Kajiado
Assistant Director
24.
Evans Kiplagat
Livestock-Bomet
Assistant Director
25.
Anne Koimbori
Agriculture-Kiambu
Director
26.
Olive Theuri
Fisheries-Kiambu
Principal Fisheries Officer
27.
Dr. Philip Ndarua
Livestock-Kiambu
Director
28.
Zachary Murimi
Livestock-Embu
Senior Assistant Director
29.
Justin Ireri
Fisheries-Embu
Assistant Director
30.
Benard Kimeto
Livestock-Narok
Principal Livestock Production
31.
Vincent Kinyua
Fisheries-Narok
Principal Fisheries Officer
32.
John Nyaga
Agriculture-Embu
Assistant Director
33.
Jackson Kamau
Fisheries-Nyandarua
Principal Fisheries Officer
34.
Mathew Ngila
Fisheries-Nakuru
Principal Fisheries Officer
35.
Michael Reuben
Livestock-Nakuru
Director
36.
Grace Kirui
Agriculture- Nakuru
Director
37.
Margaret Mwaniki
Agriculture-Nyandarua
Assistant Director

CLIMATE RESILIENT, LOW CARBON AGRICULTURE
72
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and IrrigaƟon
Kilimo House, Cathedral Road,
P. O. Box 30028 – 00100, Nairobi, Kenya.
Tel. +254-20-718870
Website: www.kilimo.go.ke
