# Tan215306

**Source:** tan215306.pdf
**Language:** en
**Country:** Tanzania

---

UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA

TANZANIA CLIMATE SMART AGRICULTURE PROGRAMME

COORDINATED BY

MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, FOOD SECURITY AND COOPERATIVES

AND

VICE PRESIDENT’S OFFICE

2015 – 2025

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

i

Contents
LIST OF TABLES ................................................................................................................................ iv
LIST OF FIGURES .............................................................................................................................. iv
FOREWORD ..................................................................................................................................... vi
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT .................................................................................................................. viii
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS ................................................................................................ ix
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .................................................................................................................. xii
1.0 INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................................... 1
1.1 Background ......................................................................................................................... 1
1.2 Alignment with the Comprehensive African Agriculture Development Programme,
National Development Goal, Agriculture Sector Strategies, National Climate Change
Strategy and Action Plans, Water Resources Management Strategic Interventions and
Action Plan for Climate Change Adaptation ........................................................................ 2
1.3 Preparation Process ........................................................................................................... 3
2.0 SITUATION ANALYSIS ............................................................................................................. 4
2.1 General Trends ................................................................................................................... 4
2.2 Agricultural Production Trends ....................................................................................... 4
2.2.1 Crop Production .......................................................................................................... 4
2.2.2 Livestock Production ................................................................................................. 7
2.2.3 Fisheries Production .................................................................................................. 8
2.2.4 Forest Resources ........................................................................................................ 9
2.3 Food Consumption and Nutrition Trends ....................................................................... 9
2.3.1 Levels of food consumption...................................................................................... 9
2.3.2 Nutrition trends ........................................................................................................ 10
2.4 Enabling Policy Environment ......................................................................................... 10
Agricultural Sector ............................................................................................................. 12
National Agricultural Policy .............................................................................................. 12

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

ii

National Climate Change Strategy (NCCS) ..................................................................... 13
2.5 Constraints to Agriculture Development and Growth ............................................... 13
2.5.1 Land Degradation and Soil Health ......................................................................... 13
2.5.2 Climate Change and Variability ............................................................................. 14
2.5.3 Agricultural Finance and Investments .................................................................. 19
2.6 Agricultural Growth Potential and Sources of Growth .............................................. 20
3.0 VISION AND OBJECTIVES ..................................................................................................... 21
3.1 Vision ................................................................................................................................. 21
3.2 Objectives ......................................................................................................................... 21
4.0 PROGRAMATIC RESULT AREAS ............................................................................................ 23
4.1 Result Area 1: Improved Productivity and Incomes ................................................... 23
4.1.1 Component 1: Improved productivity and nutrition .......................................... 23
4.1.2 Component 2: Irrigation and agricultural water management ........................ 24
4.1.3 Component 3: Improved Food Storage and Distribution ................................... 25
4.1.4 Component 4: Increased Growth of Incomes ...................................................... 26
4.2 Result Area 2: Building resilience and associated mitigation co-benefits............. 28
4.2.1 Component 1: Improve soil health, and restore degraded lands .................... 28
4.2.2 Component 2: Conservation of Natural Resources and Catchments ............... 29
4.2.3 Component 3: Insurance and Other Safety Nets ................................................. 31
4.2.4 Component 4: Early Warning System and Emergency Preparedness .............. 31
4.2.5 Component 5: Synergies in adaptation and mitigation enhanced ................... 32
4.3 Result Area 3: Value Chain Integration ........................................................................ 33
4.3.1 Component 1: Value addition process for agricultural products ..................... 33
4.3.2 Component 2: Increased competitiveness and enhanced integration into
domestic, regional and international markets .............................................................. 33
4.4 Result Area 4: Research for Development and Innovations ..................................... 35

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

iii

4.4.1 Component 1: Agricultural research funding and Uptake of Agricultural
Technologies and Innovations along the Value Chain .................................................. 35
4.4.2 Component 2: Research Extension Linkage strengthened and made functional
by 2018 ..................................................................................................................................... 36
4.5 Result Area 5: CSA Knowledge, Extension and Agro-weather Services .................. 36
4.5.1 Component 1: CSA knowledge generation and dissemination.......................... 36
4.5.2 Component 2: Enhance extension, climate information services and agro-
weather advisories ............................................................................................................. 37
4.6 Result Area 6: Improved Institutional Coordination .................................................. 38
4.6.1 Component 1: Improve Inter-Ministerial and Local Government Coordination
............................................................................................................................................... 38
4.6.2 Component 2: Partnerships with private sector and civil society
organizations ....................................................................................................................... 39
4.6.3 Component 3: Programmatic Coordination with Development Partners
strengthened ....................................................................................................................... 40
5.0 COORDINATION FRAMEWORK ............................................................................................. 41
5.1 Institutional Arrangements ............................................................................................ 41
5.2
Coordination of Activities ......................................................................................... 41
6.0
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF DIFFERENT SECTORS ............................................ 43
6.1
MAFC and MANR Divisions and Units ........................................................................ 43
6.2
Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) ...................................................... 43
6.3
Non-State Actors ......................................................................................................... 43
6.4
Sub-National Entities ................................................................................................. 44
7.0
MONITORING AND EVALUATION .................................................................................... 46
8.0
TEN - YEAR PROGRAMME FINANCING FRAMEWORK ................................................... 47
8.1 Cost Estimates and indicative Financing Plan ............................................................ 47
ANNEXES ....................................................................................................................................... 49
Annex I: Tanzania Map ........................................................................................................... 49
Annex IIa: Tanzania Agricultural Zones .............................................................................. 50

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

iv

Annex IIb: Tanzania Agricultural Map ................................................................................. 53
Annex III: Agricultural production ....................................................................................... 54
Annex IV: Agriculture Sector Financing Gap (TShs) 2010/2011 – 2014/2015 ............... 56
Annex V: Resource Requirement for Zanzibar................................................................... 56
Annex VI: Wood Fuel Demand and Consumption .............................................................. 57
Annex VII:
Logical Framework Matrix or Program Design Matrix ............................... 58
Annex VIII: Budget Estimates for 2015 - 2025 ................................................................... 66
LIST OF TABLES
Table 1: Share of Agriculture in the National Gross Domestic Product: 2005 - 2013 ..................... 4
Table 2: Production of livestock products 2008/2009 to 2013/2014 ............................................. 7
Table 3: Trends in per capita supply of major foods groups (in g/per day) .................................... 9
Table 4: The prevalence of various forms of nutrient deficiencies in Tanzania according to
population groups ......................................................................................................................... 10
Table 5: Key policies relevant for CSA implementation and scale out in Tanzania ....................... 11
Table 6: Roles and Responsibilities of Different Sectors ............................................................... 44
Table: 7. Summary of CSA Cost Estimates for 10 Years ................................................................ 48
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1: Food Crop Yield 2004 – 2013............................................................................................ 5
Figure 2: Industrial Crop Yield 2004 – 2014 .................................................................................... 5
Figure 3:  Sugarcane Yield 2004 – 2013. .......................................................................................... 6
Figure 4: Horticultural Crops Yield 2004 – 2013.............................................................................. 6
Figure 5: Livestock Population Trend. ............................................................................................. 7
Figure 6: Aquaculture Production Trend in Tanzania (2010-2014) ................................................. 8
Figure 7:  Climate change impacts in Tanzania with respect to temperature under lower (RCP
4.5) and higher (RCP 8.5) greenhouse gas emissions scenarios.................................................... 14
Figure 8: Climate change impacts in Tanzania with respect to precipitation in Tanzania under
lower (RCP 4.5) and higher (RCP 8.5) greenhouse gas emissions scenarios ................................. 15

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

v

Figure 9: Percent change in precipitation in 2080 under the higher RCP 8.5 greenhouse gas
emissions scenario based on an ensemble of 19 climate models from the IPCC Fifth Assessment
Report. ........................................................................................................................................... 16
The darker bars represent months with greater average precipitation (from Climate Wizard,
CIAT, 2015). Climate Impacts to Crops .......................................................................................... 16
Figure 10: Percent change in suitable area for major crops in Tanzania due to climate change. 17
Figure 11: Projected changes Above ground Net Primary Productivity (ANPP) in Tanzania’s
rangelands ANPP by 2050s and RCP8.5 (high-end emissions) in relation to the mean value of
1971-1980. .................................................................................................................................... 17
Figure 12: Future emission projections 2007 – 2030 Source: The Economics of Climate Change in
Tanzania ........................................................................................................................................ 18
Figure 13: Trend in Agricultural Financing (2001/02 - 2010/11). .................................................. 19
Figure 14: Coordination mechanism among the different implementers of CSA practices ......... 42

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

vi

FOREWORD

In Sub-Saharan Africa, heavy reliance on rain-fed agriculture renders farming
communities more vulnerable to effect of climate change and variability
resulting in widespread food insecurity and poverty. Climate change and
variability present new challenges particularly for smallholder farmers whose
main stay is agriculture. Providing food for the future will require a holistic
approach in order to produce on less land and by using appropriate methods.
Farming communities and researchers are obliged to re-evaluate mainstreaming
of farming practices and techniques and look for ways of securing food through
adoption of conservation agriculture, integrated livestock keeping, fish farming
and agro-forestry.
High dependence on rain-fed agriculture and poor soil health increases
vulnerability of farming systems and predisposes rural households to food
insecurity and poverty thus eroding their productive assets and weakening their
coping strategies and resilience to external shocks. Increasingly, the onset,
duration and intensity of rains vary considerably from year to year, while the
frequency and intensity of extreme weather events such as drought and floods
are on the increase with devastating impacts on the national economy and the
livelihoods of the people. Moreover agricultural seasons in some areas of the
country are expected to shift.  Drastic and innovative measures are therefore
needed to help farmers and consumers cope with the changes in emerging and
projected weather patterns.

The most affected will be the rural poor, who are dependent on farming as a
livelihood. Because of their poverty status, they have less ability to accumulate
and protect assets and have the least adaptive capacity to respond to climatic
shocks occasioned through extreme events as well as variability in weather
during the cropping seasons. Changes in climate may be faster and more
intense than in the past and existing knowledge on approaches and practices in
agriculture may not be sufficient to address the adaptation needs.

To ensure that the country is food secure and for food producers to improve
their livelihoods, climate smart agriculture (CSA) is the most appropriate
approach. The CSA approach would ensure sustainable increase in agricultural
productivity; build resilience in food systems and adapt to climate change;

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

vii

reduce food losses and waste; and contribute to the reduction and removal of
greenhouse gas emissions, where possible.
I believe that this CSA Programme, which is the result of a collective, sector-
wide consultation effort, places Tanzania firmly on a new and ambitious growth
trajectory for the future. We recognise the vital role that agriculture must play
in growing the economy and creating decent jobs. In this respect, the
agriculture sector as a whole is determined to optimise its contribution.
The successful implementation of this programme will require multi-level
partnerships between the public and private sector, civil society and citizens. I
acknowledge with appreciation the constructive and cooperative relationships
we have already built in this regard with all parties involved.
I believe that agriculture in this country will grow from strength to strength.
This, however, will require a shift in the way we do things, in line with the new
strategic approach.
Finally, I would like to thank the many people who have contributed to the
development of this programme. Our thanks to the panel of 10 experts from
across all stakeholder groups in the sector, chaired by Ms. Shakwaanande
Natai, for the pivotal role they played in guiding the development of the
Programme, and for their commitment to the process. I would also like to
express our appreciation for those who submitted comments and made inputs
that tmade the document better. We are grateful for your commitment and
dedication to walk this path with our Ministry.

Steven Masatu Wassira (MP)
MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE FOOD SECURITY AND COOPERATIVES

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

viii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The preparation of the Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) Program has
been spearheaded by a multi-disciplinary and multi-stakeholders National
Expert Team from relevant Ministries, Departments, Agencies, Researchers and
Academia, Civil Society Organization (CSOs) and Private Sector under the
auspices of the Ministry of Agriculture Food Security and Cooperatives (MAFC)
and the Vice President’s Office (VPO). Following the development of National
Adaptation Program of Action (NAPA), adoption of the National Climate Change
Strategy (NCCC) and Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan (ACRP), it was found
necessary to prepare the Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) Program to
guide implementation of the identified interventions. Preparation of the
Tanzania CSA Program would not have been possible without the financial and
technical support from the New Partnership for Africa’s Development Agency
(NEPAD), Southern African Development Cooperation (SADC), Common Market
for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), East African Community (EAC) and
the Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research Program on
Climate Change,  Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS).

Special thanks are due to National Team of Experts led by Shakwaanande Natai
(Chairperson, National CSA Program Task Force), Eng. Isaria Mwende, Ombaeli
Lemweli, Elirehema Swai, Mary Majule, Tereza Massoy, (MAFC), Joseph Kihaule
(VPO), Dr. Lucy Ssendi (PMO-RALG), Lucia Chacha (MLFD), Nassor Mkarafuu
(MANR - Zanzibar), Dr. Fadhila Hemed (NEMC), Mathew Ndaki (TMA) Prof. Salim
Maliondo (SUA) and Mary Swai (TaTEDO) for their expertise and valuable inputs
in the development of the program. Special gratitude is extended to the
Tanzania government officials in relevant ministries, Development Partners,
NGOs, Private Sector and other stakeholders who went through the draft and
shared their ideas and opinions. We would also like to acknowledge tireless
support of Dr. George Wamukoya (Climate Advisor, COMESA Secretariat) and
Dr. James Kinyangi (Regional Program Leader - CCAFS) during the process of
developing the CSA program. Finally, we appreciate the constructive
contributions received from National Stakeholder’s Validation Workshop
participants.

Sophia Elias Kaduma
PERMANENT SECRETARY
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE FOOD SECURITY AND COOPERATIVES

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

ix

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

ACRP

Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan
AEZ

Agro-ecological zone
AfDB

African Development Bank
AGOA

Africa Growth Opportunity Act
ANSAF

Agricultural Non State Actors Forum
ARI

Agricultural Research Institutes
AR5

Fifth Assessment Report
ASDP

Agriculture Sector Development Programme
ASDP-2

Second Agriculture Sector Development Programme
ASLM

Agriculture Sector Lead Ministries
AU

African Union
BFSC

Basket Fund Steering Committee
BRN

Big Results Now
CA

Conservation Agriculture
CAADP

Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme
CBF

Community Based Forest Management
CARE

CARE International
CBO

Community Based Organization

CCAFS

Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security
CGIAR

Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research
COMESA

Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA)
CSA

Climate Smart Agriculture
CSO

Civil Society Organization
DALDO

District Agricultural and Livestock Officer

DADP

District Agriculture Development Plan
DPP

Department of Policy and Planning
DRD

Department of Research and Development
DRTE

Department of Research, Training and Extension
DRM

Disaster Risk Management
EAC

East African Community
EEZ

Exclusive Economic Zone
EMU

Environment Management Unit
FANR

Food, Agriculture and Natural Resources Division
FAO

Food and Agriculture Organization
FSDP

Fishery Sector Development Program
GDP

Gross Domestic Product
HEMU

Head, Environment Management Unit
ICRAF

International Center for Research in Agroforestry
ICT

Information and Communication Technology
IFAD

International Fund for Agricultural Development
IPCC

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
KR

Key result area
LDCs

Least Developed Countries
LGA

Local Government Authority
LSDS

Livestock Sector Development Strategy

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

x

MAFC

Ministry of Agriculture Food Security and Cooperatives
MANR

Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources - Zanzibar
MDAs

Ministries/Departments/Agencies
MDGs

Millennium Development Goals
MEM

Ministry of Energy and Minerals
MICCA

Mitigation of Climate Change in Agriculture Programme
MITM

Ministry of Industries, Trade and Marketing
MIVARF

Marketing, Infrastructure, Value Addition and Rural Finance
MJUMITA

Mtandao wa Jamii wa Usimamizi wa Misitu Tanzania
MKUKUTA

National Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty
MLDF

Ministry of Livestock Development and Fisheries MLHHS
MNRT

Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism
MoFEP

Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning
MNRT

Ministry of Natural Resource and Tourism
MoW

Ministry of Water
MT

Metric Tones
MTEF

Medium Term Expenditure Framework
NAFORMA

National Forest Resource Monitoring and Assessment
NAPA

National Adaptation Plan of Action
NARS

National Agricultural Research System
NCCFP

National Climate Change Focal Point
NCCS

National Climate Change Strategy
NCCSC

National Climate Change Steering Committee
NCCTC

National Climate Change Technical Committee
NCSATF

National Climate Smart Agriculture Task Force
NEMC

National Environmental Management Council
NEPAD

New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD)
NGOs

Non-Governmental Organizations
NPS

National Panel Survey
NSGRP

National Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty
PMORALG
Prime Minister’s Office Regional Administration and Local
Government
PPP

Public Private Partnership
PPVA

Postharvest Process and Value Addition
REDD

Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation
RCP                        Representative Concentration Pathways
SACCOs

Savings and Credit Cooperative Societies
SADC

Southern African Development Community (SADC)
SAGCOT

Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor of Tanzania
SECAP

Soil Erosion Control and Agro forestry Project
SRI

Sustainable Rice Intensification
SUA

Sokoine University of Agriculture
TaCRI

Tanzania Coffee Research Institute
TADB

Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank
TDV

Tanzania Development Vision
TAFIRI

Tanzania Fisheries Research Institute
TAFORI

Tanzania Forest Research Institute

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

xi

TAFSIP

Tanzania Agriculture and Food Security Investment Plan
TASAF

Tanzania Social Action Fund

TaTEDO
Tanzania Traditional Energy Development and Environment
Organisation
TCCIA

Tanzania Chamber of Commerce, Industry and Agriculture
TFCG

Tanzania Forest Conservation Group
TIB

Tanzania Investment Bank
TMA

Tanzania Meteorological Agency
TNA

Training Needs Assessment
TORITA

Tobacco Research Institute of Tanzania
TPRI

Tropical Pesticide Research Institute
TRIT

Tea Research Institute of Tanzania
TV

Television

TWG

Technical Working Group
UDSM

University of Dar es Salaam
UN

United Nations
UNDP

United Nations Development Programme
UNFCCC

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
UNEP

United Nations Environmental Programme
URT

United Republic of Tanzania
USAID

United States Agency for International Development
VPO-DoE

Vice President's Office - Division of Environment
WARC

Ward Agricultural Resource Centre
WB

World Bank
WG I

Working Group I
WG II

Working Group I
WUE

Water Use Efficiency

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

xii

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Tanzania, an East African country, is endowed with important land and water
resources that have a high agricultural potential. Agriculture is a key sector of
Tanzania’s economy, as it accounts for 24.1 percent of GDP and is the source
of livelihoods for more than three-quarters of the population. Majority of the
population still live in rural areas although urbanization has increased in the
last three decades to reach 38 percent. The population is very young, as the
youth (18-35 years) accounts for 65 percent.

High dependence on rain-fed agriculture and poor soil health increases
vulnerability of farming systems and predisposes rural households to food
insecurity and poverty thus eroding their productive assets and weakening their
coping strategies and resilience to external shocks. Increasingly, the onset,
duration and intensity of rains vary considerably from year to year, while the
frequency and intensity of extreme weather events such as drought and floods
are on the increase with devastating impacts on the national economy and the
livelihoods of the people. Moreover agricultural seasons in some areas of the
country are expected to shift.  Drastic and innovative measures are therefore
needed to help farmers and consumers cope with the changes in emerging and
projected weather patterns.

Given that over 90.4 percent of active women in Tanzania are engaged in
agricultural activities, producing about 70 percent of the country’s food
requirements, and that youth who constitute about 65 percent of the total
labor force in Tanzania are less engaged in agricultural activities and emerging
opportunities, it is imperative that transformation and growth in the
agriculture sector target both women and the youth.

To address these challenges and to harmonize and enhance CSA initiatives
being undertaken by different stakeholders throughout the country, the
Government of Tanzania through the CSA programme, has identified six
strategic priorities as sources of Tanzania’s agricultural development and
growth in a changing climate. The six strategic priorities are as follows:

Improved Productivity and incomes – a pro-growth and pro-poor development
agenda that supports agricultural sustainability and includes better targeting to
climate change impacts will improve resilience and climate change adaptation.
Because climate change has a negative impact on agricultural production,
achieving any given food and nutrition security target will require greater
investments in agricultural productivity. It is important that Agricultural growth

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

xiii

does not jeopardize soil quality or groundwater resources. Public and private
sectors as well as public-private partnerships will play a critical role.

Building resilience and associated mitigation co-benefits - CSA practices
that will help reduce vulnerability of Tanzania’s agriculture sector by
increasing productivity, enhancing adaptation and resilience of the farming
systems and reducing emissions intensity in the context of achieving food and
nutrition security, sustainable development and poverty reduction.

Value Chain Integration - This approach is holistic in that considers input
supply, production, agricultural services, traceability, marketing and business
support services as necessary building blocks. Under the approach, both public
and private sectors are seen as critical actors in the value chain. Knowledge
and capacity building are critical strategic priorities to leverage innovations
and increase efficiencies. The approach also provides enabling framework for
integrating gender and the needs of the youth.

Research for Development and Innovations - Although Tanzania has a well-
developed agricultural research system, use of modern science and climate
smart technologies in agricultural production is still limited. Inadequate
research–extension–farmer linkages to facilitate demand-driven research and
increased use of improved technologies continue to constrain efforts to
increase agricultural productivity as farmers continue to use outdated and
ineffective technologies. The role of research will be reoriented to support
innovations that facilitate the transition to climate-smart agriculture by
smallholder farmers. New and emerging agricultural research partnerships will
identify technological advances that respond to the impacts of climate change
and climate variability. A major thrust will be on the use of climate-smart
agricultural practices, promoting improved land management and sustainable
crop-livestock and aquaculture intensification, in order to bolster farmers’
adaptive capacity and support the national vision of achieving food security.

Improving and Sustaining Agricultural Advisory Services - Agro-advisory
services that include climate applications for agriculture will help farmers to
better make informed decisions in the face of risks and uncertainties, in
addition to the integrated management of present and emerging pests and
disease challenges. Climate knowledge applications include seasonal weather
forecasts, monitoring and early warning products for drought, floods and pests
and disease surveillance. These products and services would increase the
preparedness of the farmers, well in advance, to cope with risks and

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

xiv

uncertainties. In this regard, dissemination of agro-weather advisories and
other climate-smart agricultural practices will be enhanced through Public
Private Partnerships. Furthermore, robust agro-advisory services are expected
to catalyze private sector investment in priority areas such as weather-based
index insurance and associated infrastructure. Further, insurance instruments
shall be linked to incentives for adaptation (or risk prevention and reduction,
e.g. by introducing drought resistant crops, drip irrigation, or similar
measures).

Improved Institutional Coordination – Improved institutional coordination is
crucial for achievement of horizontal and vertical integration required for
effective discharge of the CSA Programme. The achievement of horizontal
integration requires a framework that provides for high-level guidance while
vertical integration is instrumental in determining the roles of various sector
institutions and devolved governments in performing CSA mandates. The
proposed coordination framework will improve Inter-Ministerial and Local
Government coordination, enhance partnerships with private sector and civil
society organizations, and strengthen coordination with development partners.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

1

1.0
INTRODUCTION
1.1
Background

The agriculture sector is key to overall economic growth and development of
Tanzania. It provides livelihoods to over 80 per cent of the population,
generates about 24.1 percent of GDP, contributes 30 percent of export
earnings and employs 75 percent of the total labor force (URT, 2013). In the
national development agenda, agriculture is expected to lead the growth and
structural transformation of the economy and maximize the benefits of
accelerated growth. Significant improvements in the productivity of the
agriculture sector are required to raise the average real incomes of
Tanzanians. The food and agriculture sector also has direct impact on the
attainment of at least five of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and
the emerging sustainable development goals (SDGs) that include poverty
reduction. Agricultural growth is a proven driver of poverty reduction. When
agriculture stimulates growth in Africa, the growth is twice as effective in
reducing poverty as growth based in other sectors. Thus, agricultural growth
also means more production, improved food security and economic growth.

Tanzania depends largely on agriculture, which is strongly dependent on
natural resources such as land, forests, air, and water. Sustainable utilization
of these resources is vital for the growth and sustainability of the sector.
However, agriculture is vulnerable to the effects of climate change associated
with global warming. Smallholder farmers dominate the agricultural sector with
average farm sizes of between 0.2 and 2.0 hectares, depending on the
location. Yields have been mostly stagnant for the last ten years and
agricultural productivity gains have been based more on the expansion of
cultivated land, which is one of the major drivers of deforestation and land
degradation in the country. Studies by the Tanzania Meteorological Agency
(TMA) have shown that some of the previously known highly productive areas
such as the Southern and Northern Highlands will continue to be affected by
declining rainfall, frequent droughts and significant increase in spatial and
temporal variability of rainfall with long term implications in the agricultural
sector planning and resources allocation, such as improved seeds -, pesticides
and even the shifts in types of agricultural produce (URT, 2009).

Tanzania’s National Adaptation Program of Action (NAPA, 2007) ranked
agriculture and food security as the most vulnerable and important sector that
is severely impacted by climate change and advocated that studies on the
impact of climate change in the sector and on food security be a priority
activity.

Despite the uncertainty and recognizing the potential risks, climate challenges
for agriculture are reflected in Tanzania’s development plans at the highest
levels. For example, the Five-Year Development Plan (FYDP 2011/12 –

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

2

2015/16), MKUKUTA-II, National Climate Change Strategy (NCCS, 2012) and
Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan (ACRP, 2014-2019) include climate change
as a threat to economic growth and an “underlying pre-requisite” which must
be addressed to ensure success of agriculture as a core growth priority. The
NCCS highlights agriculture as a key climate-sensitive sector where impacts of
climate variability are already experienced by farmers, including declines in
agricultural productivity, shifting Agro Ecological Zones (AEZ), increased
incidents of pests and diseases, and increasingly unreliable rainfall. This CSA
Program will support climate change adaptation and mitigation initiatives in
the agricultural sector.

Climate-smart agriculture, forestry and fisheries (CSA), as defined by FAO
2010, - contributes to the achievement of sustainable development goals and
integrates the three dimensions of sustainable development (economic, social
and environmental) by jointly addressing food security and climate challenges.
CSA has three main pillars:

Sustainably increasing agricultural productivity and incomes.

Adapting and building resilience to climate change.

Reducing and/or removing greenhouse gases emissions, where possible.
CSA is an approach to developing the technical, policy and investment
conditions to achieve sustainable agricultural development for food security
under climate change. In this context, the CSA approach in Tanzania is
designed to identify and operationalize sustainable agricultural development
within the explicit parameters of climate change and variability

1.2
Alignment with the continental, regional and national agriculture and
climate change policies, strategies and plans

This CSA Programme is aligned with the national economic blue print –
Tanzania Vision 2025 and the National Development Plan. The Programme is
also in line with the broad national objectives of the agricultural sector of
contributing towards attainment and maintenance of domestic supply of main
food items, production of raw materials for industries and creation of gainful
employment of men, women and the youth. Similarly, the CSA Programme is
aligned with the Water Resources Management Strategic Interventions and
Action Plan for Climate Change Adaptation. The programme is further aligned
with National REDD+ Strategy and Action Plan as it addresses the main drivers
of deforestation and forest degradation. At the regional level, the CSA Program
enhances the implementation of the Comprehensive African Agriculture
Development Programme (CAADP) and responds to the 23rd Ordinary African
Union Assembly – Decisions and Declaration (Malabo Declaration), in particular:
Assembly/AU/Dec.
538
(XXIII)
on
Climate
Change
and
agriculture;
Assembly/AU/Decl.1
(XXIII)
on
Accelerated
agricultural
growth
and
transformation; and Assembly/AU/Decl.4 (XXIII) on Nutrition security for
Inclusive economic Growth and Sustainable Development. At the national level,

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

3

the CSA Program will contribute to Tanzania’s efforts to adapt and build
resilience in - agriculture under the National Adaptation plan of Action (NAPA),
The National Climate Change Strategy (NCCS), Agriculture Climate Resilient
Plan (ACRP) and The National REDD+ Strategy and Action Plan. The CSA
Program is intended to harmonize and enhance CSA initiatives being
undertaken by different stakeholders.

1.3
Preparation Process

In preparation of this CSA Program, the Ministry of Agriculture Food Security
and Cooperatives and the Vice President’s Office pursued a consultative
approach under the guidance of a Multi-disciplinary Team of Experts drawn
from relevant Ministries and Departments, Agencies, Civil Society Organization
(CSOs), Private Sectors, Researchers and Academia. The Program was
developed through a four-step procedure as follows:
1. conducting technical working sessions that took stock of the sector’s
programmes, strategies and performance from a historical perspective, as
well as an analysis of options for agricultural sector growth in a changing
climate;

2. consultative sessions were carried out with interested groups, particularly
the National Designated Authority (NDA) for Green Climate Fund (GCF),
Global Environment Facility (GEF) Focal Point, Planning Commission,
Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar, CSOs, umbrella private sector
organizations such as the Tanzania private sector association and farmer
organizations, Local Government Authority and Development Partners;

3. National
stakeholder
validation
workshop
where
comments
from
stakeholders were discussed and incorporated; and

4. Resource mobilization to support implementation of Tanzania CSA
Programme.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

4

2.0
SITUATION ANALYSIS

2.1
General Trends

The agriculture sector in Tanzania provides livelihoods to over 80 percent of
the population, generates about 24.1 percent of GDP (Table 1), contributes 30
percent of export earnings and employs 75 percent of the total labor force
(URT, 2013). Tanzania is endowed with 44 million hectares (46 percent of total
land) suitable for agriculture. However, part of this arable land is only
marginally suitable for agricultural production due to a combination of factors
including infertile soils, soil erosion, degradation and likelihood of drought.
Moreover, about 28% of the land area is inaccessible to agriculture as it is
under protection as Forest reserves and Wildlife protected areas.  Currently,
only 32 percent of the available arable land is cultivated. Tanzania also has
significant potential for irrigated agriculture, with the area suitable for
irrigation estimated to be about 29.4 million ha. Yet only 1.5 percent (441,000
ha) of potential irrigated areas is currently under irrigation. Smallholder
agriculture is predominantly rain fed especially in arid and semi-arid regions
that depend entirely on subsistence livestock and food crop production for
their livelihoods.

Table 1: Share of Agriculture in the National Gross Domestic Product: 2005 -
2013
YEAR
SECTOR (percent)
Agriculture Industry
Services
Other (Net Indirect
Taxes)
2005
26.9
20.8
42.5
9.8
2006
25.3
20.8
43.3
10.6
2007
25.0
21.2
43.3
10.5
2008
24.9
21
43.8
10.3
2009
23.8
22
43.6
10.6
2010
24.1
21
49.5
5.4
2011
24.7
21
50
4.3
2012
24.8
21
50
4.2
2013
24.7
25
47.7
24.7
Source: URT (2013). The Economic Survey, Ministry of Finance.

2.2
Agricultural Production Trends

2.2.1 Crop Production
Smallholder farmers dominate the agricultural sector with average farm sizes
of between 0.2 and 2.0 hectares, depending on the location. Yields have been

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

5

mostly stagnant for the last ten years and agricultural productivity gains have
been based more on the expansion of cultivated land, which is one of the
major drivers of deforestation and land degradation in the country. The major
food crops include maize, sorghum, rice, pulses, cassava and potatoes (Figure
1).
Figure 1: Food Crop Yield 2004 – 2013

Source: FAOSTAT 28/03/2015

Industrial crops (Figures 2 & 3), commonly referred to as cash crops, are mainly
grown as a source of income. These include tea, coffee, pyrethrum, tobacco,
sisal, cashew and sugarcane among others.
Figure 2: Industrial Crop Yield 2004 – 2014

Source: FAOSTAT 28/03/2015

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

6

Figure 3:  Sugarcane Yield 2004 – 2013.

Source: FAOSTAT 28/03/2015

The horticulture sub-sector is one of the fastest growing sectors contributing to
food security, nutrition improvements and economic growth (Figure 4). It has
been identified as one of the priority sub-sectors in the National Export
Strategy (2008), the Kilimo Kwanza Resolution and a key component in the
diversification of the agricultural sector from over dependence on traditional
primary agricultural products. The sub-sector has a potential to become one of
the main sources of foreign exchange earnings and a significant driver of
economic growth. For instance, indigenous fruits, vegetables, spices and
flowers have been cultivated in Tanzania for generations and traded
throughout the region and internationally (e.g. the country is thought to have
started exporting bean seed to Europe in the 1950s). Horticulture is mainly
practised by small-scale farmers with a few large-scale operators. Local and
foreign investors endow the floriculture and export vegetables sub-sector.
Figure 4: Horticultural Crops Yield 2004 – 2013

Source: FAOSTAT 28/03/2015

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

7

2.2.2 Livestock Production
The country has an estimated population of 22.8 million cattle, 15.6 million
goats, 7 million sheep, 35.5 million local chickens; 24.5 million improved
chicken breed and 2.1 million pigs1. However, 97 percent of all livestock are
indigenous breeds which are kept by rural farmers and are grazed under
natural pasture, while only 3 percent are improved breeds either grazed and or
fed in cut and carry systems with minimal supplements.
Figure 5: Livestock Population Trend.

Source: Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries Development, 2014

Table 2: Production of livestock products 2008/2009 to 2013/2014
Source: Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries Development (2014)

1 Budget Speech 2014/2015
Product
2008/09
2009/10
2010/11
2011/12
2012/13
2013/2014
Meat Production (Tonnes)
Cattle
225,178
243,943
262,606
289,835
299,581
309,353
Goats/sheep
82,884
86,634
103,709
111,106
115,652
120,199
Pig
36,000
38,180
43,647
47,246
50,814
79,174
Chicken
78,168
80,916
93,534
84,524
87,408
54,360
Total
422,230
449,673
503,496
532,711
553,455
563,086
Milk Production ('000' litres)
Local Cattle
1,012,436
997,261
1,135,422
1,255,938
1,297,775
1,339,613
Modern
Cattle
591,690
652,596
577,962
597,161
623,865
650,570
Total
1,604,126
1,649,857
1,713,384
1,853,098
1,921,640
1,990,183
Egg Production ('000')
Eggs
2,806,350
2,917,875
3,339,566
3,494,584
3,725,200
3,899,568,750

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

8

Despite the large livestock population size, its contribution to the national
economy (GDP) has persistently been declining from 18 percent in 2001 to 4.4
percent (TBS, 2013). Major challenges include recurring droughts which reduce
pasture productivity and water availability; alien invasive species, pests and
diseases. Furthermore, uncontrolled livestock mobility brings about conflicts
between crop farmers and livestock keepers.

2.2.3 Fisheries Production
Tanzania has total water area of 62,000 km2 potential currently employing
more than 4 million people. In Zanzibar, the fisheries sector is largely artisanal
currently employing about 20 percent of the island population with mariculture
activities such as seaweed and prawn farming also supplementing the incomes
of - island households. Climate change impacts on fisheries are mainly
associated with degradation of fish areas and fish stock. For instance, sea level
rise, which is associated with global warming, may cause sea water to rise
above optimal levels, and increased sea water acidification bleaching corals,
causing degradation of fish nursery grounds, breeding and feeding areas.
Moreover, drought and frequent floods increases sedimentation in freshwaters,
negatively affecting fisheries in fresh water bodies. Aquaculture in Tanzania
has a huge potential but yet untapped for widespread household and
commercial use. The high potential for development of aquaculture is due to
availability of water resources and diversified species in the wild potentially
suitable for aquaculture. Currently, the total number of people involved in the
aquaculture is about 17,100 (with 14,100 involved in freshwater fish farming
and about 3,000 in seaweed farming). Youths play an important role in
aquaculture in pond construction, management and distribution of fish.

Figure 6: Aquaculture Production Trend in Tanzania (2010-2014)

Source: Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries Development

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

9

2.2.4 Forest Resources
The total forest area in Tanzania is 48 million ha, of which 93 percent of this is
woodlands and only 7 percent are classified as forest reserves (mangroves,
coastal forests, humid montane forests and plantations). Forest ecosystems in
Tanzania are major sources of various ecosystem goods and services. They
cover and protect most of the water catchments in the country and serve as a
link in the agriculture-water-energy nexus. Besides timber and other non-
timberforest products, the most important use of wood in Tanzania is provision
biomass energy (fuel wood and charcoal) used by over 90% of the population.
Some forest areas also support agriculture and livestock keeping.
2.3
Food Consumption and Nutrition Trends

2.3.1 Levels of food consumption
Cereals and roots and tubers serve as staples for the majority of the population
in rural as well as in urban areas. Maize is consumed in all regions, especially in
rural areas while rice is mostly consumed in urban and coastal regions. Other
staples include plantain, potatoes, rice, cassava and sorghum. Other cereals
such as sorghum and millet; roots and tubers such as yams and sweet potatoes
are known but contribute less to the diet, as they are less preferred. The main
dish is a stiff porridge (known in Kiswahili as ugali) made from maize flour,
sorghum or cassava. The staple is eaten with a relish either made of
vegetables, sardines, pulses or meat. The diet is often monotonous with a
limited diversity of foods; it is based on starchy foods with high fibre content.
Frequency of vegetable consumption is high, especially among rural
communities where they are included in every meal, but generally quantities
are small. Therefore, vegetables do not contribute substantially to nutrient
intake.

Table 3: Trends in per capita supply of major foods groups (in g/per day)
Major food groups
Supply for human consumption in g/day
1966-68  1973-75  1980-82  1987-89  1994-96  2001-2003
Starchy roots
742
755
691
494
592
518
Cereals (excl. beer)
181
245
318
328
283
307
Fruit and vegetables
283
257
262
228
173
158
Other
149
152
280
211
203
191
Milk and eggs
87
75
71
67
62
72
Pulses, nuts, oil crops
54
51
52
55
44
42
Meat and offals
32
30
30
33
31
30
Fish, seafood
28
33
32
42
26
19
Sweeteners
20
23
18
13
18
21
Vegetable oils
7
9
10
11
11
14
Animal fats
3
3
2
2
2
2

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

10

Source: FAOSTAT

In rural areas and among the low-income section of the urban population, the
quantity of food consumed can be limited and meal frequency varies with the
season. It is limited to one meal per day during the wet season (lean months)
and to two meals during the dry or harvest season. Frequency of meat and milk
consumption is extremely low, on average once a week or even less. Among
certain communities these products are consumed very rarely, for example
once a month or less.

2.3.2 Nutrition trends

Under-nutrition and malnutrition are still highly prevalent in Tanzania. More
than a third of children under five years are affected by chronic malnutrition
(stunting). In the Southern zone prevalence surpasses 50 percent. Stunting is
due to a combination of factors including maternal malnutrition, inadequate
infant feeding practices, low quality of health care and poor hygiene.
Breastfeeding is widely practiced but exclusive breastfeeding is not widespread
and complementary feeding practices are inadequate. At the same time, the
country is undergoing a nutrition transition due to changes in dietary habits,
especially among middle and high-income groups living in urban areas who
consume energy dense and processed foods. The prevalence of overweight and
obesity is noticeable among women (almost one woman out of five).

Table 4: The prevalence of various forms of nutrient deficiencies in
Tanzania according to population groups
Category of population affected
Type of deficiency and percent affected
PED
Anaemia
IDD
VAD
Children under-five years
52.0
45.0
13.0
30.0
Pregnant and lactating women
13.0
80.0
52.0
0.7
Remaining groups
20.0
20.0
40.0
0.1
General population
28.0
32.0
25.0
6.1
Source: Kavishe F.P (1987), TFNC Report no. 1215

2.4
Enabling Policy Environment

Policy reforms are cited as one of the drivers of productivity gains experienced
in the agriculture sector. These policy reforms substantially improve the
economic environment for agriculture through improvements in better policies
on pricing -, trade, exchange rates, institutions and markets. The Government
of the United Republic of Tanzania has over the years developed policies and
strategies to enhance agricultural growth, natural resource management and
climate change interventions. The Table 5 below summarizes the key policies
and strategies that the GoT ratified and implemented in the country, and
which, through their objectives and action plans, have an impact on CSA

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

11

implementation (Table 3). The summary of the enabling and (potentially)
obstructing policies are provided in Table 5.

Table 5: Key policies relevant for CSA implementation and scale out in
Tanzania
Regional

Comprehensive
Africa Agriculture
Development
Programme
(CAADP)
Based on four reinforcing pillars for investment in agriculture
to improve performance through strengthening country
presence, focused lending program based on coordinated
sector plans, enhanced capacity for policy, analytical work,
and knowledge/partnership management:
1. Expanding the areas under sustainable land management
and reliable water control systems.
2. Improving rural infrastructure and trade related capacities
for market access
3. Increasing food supply and reducing hunger
4. Expanding agricultural research and technology transfer and
dissemination

East Africa
Community Food
Security Action
Plan
Developed to address food insecurity in the region. It forms the
initial step of implementing the provisions of the EAC Treaty as
set out in Chapter 18 Articles 105 -110.  One of the main
objectives of the EAC as set out in the Treaty is the
achievement of food security and rational agricultural
production. The EAC- Food Security Action Plan will guide
coordination and implementation of the joint programmes and
projects emanating from this plan.

East Africa
Community
Climate Change
Policy
The purpose is to guide EAC Partner States and other
stakeholders on the implementation of collective measures to
address climate change impacts and causes in the region
through adaptation and mitigation actions while assuring
sustainable social and economic development.

Macro economics

Tanzania
Development
Vision (TDV) 2025
Developed with the intention of coordinating and directing
national’s efforts and resources towards economic and social
development by 2025.
1. Achieving quality life for all,
2. Good governance and the rule of law, and
3. Building a strong and resilient economy that can effectively
withstand global competition.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

12

The National
Strategy for
Growth and
Reduction of
Poverty II

Sets targets and goals on accelerating economic growth,
reducing poverty and improving living standards and social
welfare of Tanzanians.
Agricultural Sector

National
Agricultural Policy
Aims at setting instruments for the development of an
efficient, competitive and profitable agricultural industry that
contributes to nation’s economic growth and wellbeing of
Tanzanians.
Tanzania
Agriculture and
Food Security
Investment Plan
(TAFSIP)
Ten-year investment plan, which maps the investments,
needed to achieve the CAADP target of six percent annual
growth in agricultural sector GDP. It aims to contribute to the
national economic growth, household income and food security
in line with national and sectoral development aspirations.

Agricultural Sector
Development
Programme (ASDP)
Main objectives are to enable farmers to have better access to
and use of agricultural knowledge, technologies, marketing
systems and infrastructures for higher productivity and
profitability; and to promote involvement of the private sector
in agricultural transformation under improved regulatory and
policy frameworks.
Livestock Sector
Development
Strategy (LSDS)
Aims at developing a competitive and more efficient livestock
industry that contributes to the improvement of the livelihoods
of all livestock keepers and the national economy.

Fisheries Sector
Development
Programme (FSDP)
Designed to develop a sustainable, competitive and more
efficient fisheries and aquaculture industry that contribute to
the sustainable livelihood improvement and the national
economy.

Tanzania
Agriculture
Climate Resilience
Plan (ACRP)
Developed to implement strategic adaptation and mitigation
actions in the crops sub-sector. It presents a wide range of
adaptation options including, but not limited to: improving
agricultural land and water management, accelerating uptake
of CSA, reducing impacts of climate-related shocks through risk
management, and strengthening knowledge and systems to
targeted climate action.

Southern
Agricultural
Growth Corridor
of Tanzania
(SAGCOT)
The goal is to expand investment in agribusiness leading to
income
growth
among
smallholders
and
employment
generation across agribusiness value chains in the Southern
Corridor

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

13

Big Result Now
(BRN)
The objective is to address critical sector constraints and
challenges and to speed-up agriculture GDP, improve
smallholder incomes and ensure food security by 2015, mainly
through smallholder aggregation models for main cereals and
high potential crops contributing to import substitution, farm
income and food security.
Environment and Climate Change
National
Environmental
Policy (NEP)
Aims at ensuring sustainable and equitable use of resources for
meeting basic needs, preventing and controlling degradation of
land, water, vegetation and air, and improving the condition
and productivity of degraded rural and urban areas
National Climate
Change Strategy
(NCCS)

Sets out strategic interventions for climate change adaptation
measures and greenhouse gas emissions reductions. It has
outlined objectives for all sectors and proposed strategic
interventions in those sectors and themes that are highly
vulnerable to climate change such as agriculture.
Land, Land use and Forestry
The National
Strategy (and
Action Plan) for
Reduced Emissions
from
Deforestation and
Forest
Degradation
(REDD+)
The strategy (and plan) aims to facilitate effective and
coordinated framework for reducing deforestation and forest
degradation. It guides the implementation and coordination of
mechanisms required for Tanzania to benefit from a post-2012
internationally approved system for forest carbon trading,
based on demonstrated emission reductions from deforestation
and forest degradation and other aspects of REDD+

2.5
Constraints to Agriculture Development and Growth

2.5.1 Land Degradation and Soil Health
Demands on the land for economic development and pressures from a growing
population are leading to unprecedented land use change. In turn,
unsustainable land use is driving land degradation. The result is - loss of land
productivity with impacts on livelihoods and the economy. The impacts of land
degradation and desertification include a reduction in crop and pasture
productivity and fuel-wood and non-timber forest products, which are closely
linked to poverty and food insecurity. The damage to soil, loss of habitat,
water shortages, and siltation reduce biodiversity and ecosystem services and
has wider economic consequences. Land degradation manifests itself in many
forms; among them are soil erosion, increased sediment loading of water
bodies, loss of soil fertility, increased salinity, reduced ground cover, and the
reduced carrying capacity of pastures. To address this challenge, the

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

14

government launched the National Strategy on Urgent Actions to Combat the
Degradation of Land and Water Catchment Areas in Tanzania (URT, 2006) that
has not yet been fully implemented.

2.5.2 Climate Change and Variability

Agriculture in Tanzania is acutely vulnerable to the impacts of climate change
due to dependency on climate. Unreliable rainfall, extreme weather events
and poor rainfall distribution are the most damaging risks of production among
smallholder farmers and fisher-folks. Drought and floods are the major natural
disasters in Tanzania accounting for up to 70 percent of all recorded natural
calamities causing large-scale famine, diseases and deaths for human beings,
plants and animals.

A range of Global Circulation Models (GCM) and emission scenarios projections
indicate future changes in rainfall and increases in average annual
temperatures of 1ºC to 3ºC above the baseline period (1961-1999) by the 2050s,
with the latest projections indicating a high certainty of a 1 ºC rise across the
country.  Figures 7 and 8 show Climate change impacts in Tanzania with
respect to temperature and rainfall respectively under lower (RCP 4.5) and
higher (RCP 8.5) greenhouse gas emissions scenarios.

Figure 7:  Climate change impacts in Tanzania with respect to temperature
under lower (RCP 4.5) and higher (RCP 8.5) greenhouse gas emissions
scenarios

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

15

The thick black lines represent the average of 29 different climate models,
whereas the grey box and dashed lines represent the range of climate models.
Although precipitation is projected to increase by most climate models, the
timing of precipitation is also changing with some months projected to
decrease.

Figure 8: Climate change impacts in Tanzania with respect to precipitation
in Tanzania under lower (RCP 4.5) and higher (RCP 8.5) greenhouse gas
emissions scenarios

Although climate change is projected to bring more rain to Tanzania in some
areas, models show that this increase in rainfall is only during the middle of
the rainy season (November-April rain season) with all other months projected
to decrease in precipitation (see Figure 9). This would result in the rainy
season becoming shorter but more intense, and the dry season becoming drier.
Increased intensity in frequency of storms, drought, flooding, may alter the
hydrological cycles while variable precipitation may have implications for food,
pasture and water availability.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

16

Figure 9: Percent change in precipitation in 2080 under the higher RCP 8.5
greenhouse gas emissions scenario based on an ensemble of 19 climate
models from the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report.

The darker bars represent months with greater average precipitation (from
Climate Wizard, CIAT, 2015). Climate Impacts to Crops

Agricultural crop modeling shows that climate change has impacts depending
on the crop. Maize is expected to have 25 to 75 percent decreases in area
suitable for cultivation (Figure 10). Likewise, sorghum is expected to have a
moderate decrease in area suitable for cultivation. However other crops such
as beans, cassava and banana are expected to increase in area suitable. While
forage for livestock grazing is very important to Tanzania, climate change is
projected to decrease rangeland productivity (Figure 11 below).

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

17

Figure 10: Percent change in suitable area for major crops in Tanzania due
to climate change.

The red line represents the average projected change and the blue box and
dashed lines represent uncertainty associated with the crop modeling. Analysis
provide by J. Vargas, CIAT

Figure 11: Projected changes Above ground Net Primary Productivity (ANPP)
in Tanzania’s rangelands ANPP by 2050s and RCP8.5 (high-end emissions) in
relation to the mean value of 1971-1980.

This provides a good proxy for climate change impacts to livestock
productivity.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

18

Tanzania currently has very low emissions of Greenhouse Gases (GHG), in total
and per capita. The published inventory for 1994 puts per capita emissions at
1.3 tones of CO2e (all GHGs) and 0.1 tCO2 (CO2 only). However, if land use
changes and forestry (including deforestation) are included, the per capita
emission estimates rise to 2.67 (all GHGs) and 1.65 (CO2 only). The key
emitting sectors are forestry, due to deforestation, and agriculture, primarily
from livestock (CH4 from enteric fermentation) and soils (N2O from fertilizers,
animal manure, etc.). These two sectors accounted for 93percent of emissions
in 1994 (forests 70percent, agriculture 23percent). In the future, it is
inevitable that GHG emissions in Tanzania will increase under the planned
current development baseline. For example, between 2005 and 2030 under the
current projected baseline, per capita emissions are set to increase to 1.5
tCO2e and 0.5 tCO2 (CO2 only). The future emission projections (excluding LUCF
sector) are shown in Figure below

Figure 12: Future emission projections 2007 – 2030 Source: The Economics
of Climate Change in Tanzania

Building resilience and adaptation in the agriculture sector is very crucial due
to the vulnerability and the observed impacts of climate change in the country.
With a vulnerable rainfed agricultural sector, a well-functioning early warning
system is a key factor in risk reduction and enhancing productivity. The
institution responsible for provision of early warning information in Tanzania
include Tanzania Meteorological Agency (TMA), in collaboration with
international partners and national partners such as Ministry of Agriculture
Food Security and Cooperatives (MAFC), Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries
Development - and Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism. However, these
early warning systems are inefficient in terms of the means of communicating
the intended information. The common means of communicating the
information is via radio and Television broadcasting, newspapers, websites and

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

19

emails. With this method, the information is not delivered on time, and thus
difficult to integrate it into farming decisions.

2.5.3 Agricultural Finance and Investments

The Government through the national budget is the main funder of the
agricultural sector, supplemented by Development Partners (DPs), private
sector and civil society organizations thus making significant contributions to
the sector. According to the Maputo Declaration of the African Union in 2003,
it was agreed that all African countries, including Tanzania strive to commit at
least 10 percent of the national budgets to agriculture. Although Tanzania has
not attained the annual target of 10 percent, over the years, there has been a
remarkable increase in investments in agriculture currently standing at about 8
percent.

Figure 13: Trend in Agricultural Financing (2001/02 - 2010/11).

In addition, the Government in collaboration with DPs and private sector have
put in place measures aimed at improving the flow of finance and investment
to the agriculture sector such as: the Export Credit Guarantee Scheme, USAID
Guarantee for Input Scheme, Private Agriculture Sector Support (PASS), the
Agro-Dealers Scheme and the Agriculture Input Trust Fund (AGIFT).  Other
initiatives that enhance Public Private Partnerships include the Southern
Agricultural Growth Corridor of Tanzania (SAGCOT) and Big Results Now (BRN).
One of the main constraints to private sector investment in agriculture is lack
of appropriate financing arrangement, particularly considering the high risks
associated with investments in the agriculture as compounded by the impacts
of climate change and climate variability.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

20

2.6
Agricultural Growth Potential and Sources of Growth

Agriculture in Tanzania has a huge potential and opportunities for
development. About 44 million hectares are suitable for agricultural production
and only 10.8 million hectares (25%) are cultivated mostly under subsistence
agriculture (i.e., smallholders operating between 0.2 and 2 hectares with low
productivity). The potential therefore exists for expansion and intensification.
In addition, the area with irrigation potential is 29.4 million hectares, but only
1.5 % (440,000 ha) so far utilized.

Tanzania has a dual agricultural economy: smallholder farmers on one side
dominate the agricultural sector, carrying out rainfed agriculture, producing a
variety of subsistence crops, such as maize, sorghum, millet, cassava, sweet
potatoes, pulses, paddy, wheat, fruits and vegetables. On the other side, cash
crops like sisal, sugarcane and tea are grown on large-scale commercial farms
and cashew nut, coffee, cotton and tobacco are grown on small-scale farms.
Peri-urban agriculture (mainly horticultural crops) for household food
consumption is rapidly increasing.

High dependence on rainfed agriculture and poor soil health largely due to land
mismanagement increases vulnerability of farming systems and predisposes
rural households to food insecurity and poverty thus eroding their productive
assets and weakening their coping strategies and resilience. Increasingly, the
onset, duration and intensity of rains vary considerably from year to year,
while the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events such as drought
and floods are on the increase with devastating impacts on the national
economy and the livelihoods of the people. Moreover agricultural seasons in
some areas of the country are expected to shift. Drastic and innovative
measures are needed to help farmers and consumers cope with the changes in
emerging and projected weather patterns.

Over 90.4 percent of active women in Tanzania are engaged in agricultural
activities, producing about 70 percent of the country’s food requirements.
Moreover, youth who constitute about 65 percent of the total labor force in
Tanzania,
are
less
engaged
in
agricultural
activities
and
emerging
opportunities. It is imperative that transformation and growth in the
agriculture sector target both women and the youth.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

21

3.0
VISION AND OBJECTIVES
3.1
Vision

The Vision for the CSA Program is to have an “Agricultural sector that
sustainably increases productivity, enhances climate resilience and food
security for the national economic development in line with Tanzania
National Development Vision 2025.”
3.2
Objectives
The five core objectives of the Country CSA Programme are:
1. Increase productivity of the agricultural sector through (appropriate)
climate smart agriculture practices that consider gender.
2. Enhance climate resilience of agricultural and food systems.
3. Strengthen policy, legal and institutional framework to increase efficiency
and effective implementation of climate smart agriculture.
4. Improve infrastructure to support value addition, marketing, trade and
postharvest management.
5. Develop financing mechanisms to solicit resources through national,
international and public private partnerships to support climate smart
agriculture.

The Programme, therefore, aims to build resilience of agricultural farming
systems for enhanced food and nutrition security through six Programmatic
Result Areas, namely:

Improved Productivity and incomes – a pro-growth and pro-poor development
agenda that supports agricultural sustainability and includes better targeting to
climate change impacts will improve resilience and climate change adaptation.
Because climate change has a negative impact on agricultural production,
achieving any given food and nutrition security target will require greater
investments in agricultural productivity. It is important that Agricultural growth
does not jeopardize soil quality or groundwater resources. Public and private
sectors as well as public-private partnerships will play a critical role.

Building resilience and associated mitigation co-benefits - CSA will help
reduce vulnerability of Tanzania’s agriculture sector by increasing productivity,
enhancing adaptation and resilience of the farming systems and reducing
emissions intensity in the context of achieving food and nutrition security,
sustainable development and poverty reduction.

Value Chain Integration - This approach is holistic in that it considers input
supply, production, agricultural services, traceability, marketing and business
support services as necessary building blocks. Under the approach, both public
and private sectors are seen as critical actors in the value chain. Knowledge

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

22

and capacity building are critical strategic priorities to leverage innovations
and increase efficiencies. The approach also provides enabling framework for
integrating gender and the needs of the youth.

Research for Development and Innovations - Although Tanzania has a well-
developed agricultural research system, use of modern science and climate
smart technologies in agricultural production is still limited. Inadequate
research–extension–farmer linkages to facilitate demand-driven research and
increased use of improved technologies continue to constrain efforts to
increase agricultural productivity as farmers continue to use outdated and
ineffective technologies. The role of research will be reoriented to support
innovations that facilitate the transition to climate-smart agriculture by
smallholder farmers. New and emerging agricultural research partnerships will
identify technological advances that respond to the impacts of climate change
and climate variability. A major thrust will be on the use of climate-smart
agricultural practices, promoting improved land management and sustainable
crop-livestock and fisheries intensification, in order to bolster farmers’
adaptive capacity and support the national vision of achieving food security.

Improving and Sustaining Agricultural Advisory Services - Agro-advisory
services that include climate applications for agriculture will help farmers to
better make informed decisions in the face of risks and uncertainties, in
addition to the integrated management of present and emerging pests and
disease challenges. Climate applications include seasonal weather forecasts,
monitoring and early warning products for drought, floods and pests and
disease surveillance. These products and services would increase the
preparedness of the farmers, well in advance, to cope with risks and
uncertainties. In this regard, dissemination of agro-weather advisories and
other climate-smart agricultural practices will be enhanced through Public
Private Partnerships. Furthermore, robust agro-advisory services would
catalyze private sector investment in priority areas such as weather-based
index insurance and associated infrastructure.

Improved Institutional Coordination – Improved institutional coordination is
crucial for achievement of horizontal and vertical integration required for
effective discharge of the CSA Programme. The achievement of horizontal
integration requires a framework that provides for high-level guidance while
vertical integration is instrumental in determining the roles of various sector
institutions and devolved governments in performing CSA mandates. The
proposed coordination framework will improve Inter-Ministerial and Local
Government coordination; enhance partnerships with private sector and civil
society organizations; and strengthen coordination with development partners.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

23

4.0
PROGRAMATIC RESULT AREAS

4.1
Result Area 1: Improved Productivity and Incomes

4.1.1 Component 1: Improved productivity and nutrition

Development issues:

 Low use of CSA technologies and practices in crops, livestock and
fisheries by men and women farmers/fisher-folk.
 Low use of inputs by smallholder men and women farmers.
 High levels of stunting and high mineral deficiency levels.
 High poverty levels.
 Low capacity for adaptation to climate change and variability
 Poor knowledge  on CSA technologies

4.1.1.1 Output 1: Sustainable CSA technologies adopted by smallholder
farmers and yields of staple crops (such as maize, rice, sorghum,
cassava, potatoes and beans) increased by 50 percent by 2025.

Actions:

1. Identify, upgrade, disseminate and practice climate smart technological
packages.
2. Introduce improved crop varieties (high yielding, early maturing, disease
and pest resistant and nutrient fortified).
3. Increase access to farm inputs (fertilizers/pesticides/seeds/vet drugs)
and its wise  application/use
4. Strengthen surveillance of agricultural input trade and use.
5. Identification of best indigenous knowledge and its interaction with
scientific knowledge to enhance climate change adaptation
6. Train farmers on CSA agronomic practices

4.1.1.2 Output 2: Production of poultry, cattle, small ruminants and pigs
increased by 30 percent through adoption of sustainable CSA
technologies

Actions:

1. Introduce improved livestock breeds (increased productivity, disease
resistant and drought tolerant).
2. Undertake genetic characterization and improvement of local livestock
breeds.
3. Identify, upgrade, disseminate and practice livestock technological
packages.
4. Train farmers on livestock husbandry and disease management.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

24

4.1.1.3 Output 3: Productivity of aquaculture increased by 50 percent by
2025.

Actions:
1. Develop and disseminate best management practices of aquaculture
throughout the country.
2. Train fisher folks in good fishing practices.
3. Strengthen fish health and disease surveillance.
4. Strengthen and increase fingerlings breeding and multiplication centers
5. Strengthen integrated fish farming (e.g. in paddy farms)
6. Sensitize and support private sector involvement in fingerling and feed
production and distribution

4.1.1.4 Output 4: Stunting and underweight in children as well as
micronutrient deficiencies in children and women of reproductive
age reduced by 50 percent by 2025.

Actions:
1. Promote production and consumption of high quality protein cereals,
orange fleshed sweet potatoes (for vitamin A) and leafy vegetables.
2. Develop other high quality staples through breeding – cassava, rice,
potatoes etc.
3. Promote fortification of staples during processing (micronutrient
fortification and blending products).
4. Educate and train consumers on appropriate food combination

4.1.2 Component 2: Irrigation and agricultural water management

Development issues:

 Overdependence of agriculture on inadequate and erratic rainfall (rain-
fed agriculture).
 Inadequate infrastructure development for irrigation, drainage and
water storage
 Inefficient water use of existing irrigation systems.
 Low productivity on existing irrigation schemes.
 Inadequate and un-coordinated information in irrigation research,
science and technology.
 Inadequate operation and maintenance practices of existing irrigation
schemes.
 Limited knowledge on the role of in-situ rainwater harvesting
technologies through tillage and Conservation Agriculture.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

25

4.1.2.1 Output 1: Irrigation schemes productivity increased by 25
percent and integrated farming systems increased by 50 percent
by 2025.

Actions:
1. Promote development and diffusion of appropriate efficient small-scale
irrigation technological packages.
2. Train extension workers on irrigation and water management
technologies and skills.
3. Build the capacity of Irrigators Organizations in agricultural water
management and their obligations
4. Undertake comprehensive management needs assessment of existing
large scale irrigation schemes.

4.1.2.2 Output 2: 1.5 million ha of irrigation developed by 2025 to
benefit 2.3 million households.

Actions:
1. Review of the National Irrigation Master Plan (2002) and update
irrigation potential areas for small scale irrigation systems.
2. Train farmers in the installation, operation and maintenance of
recommended irrigation technologies.
3. Establish links to input and output markets and service providers
(strengthen value chain and technical backstopping).

4.1.2.3 Output 3: 500,000 ha of integrated farming systems with
sustainable
water
harvesting
and
management
systems
developed by 2025 to benefit 700,000 households.

Actions:

1. Identify suitable areas for rainwater harvesting and agricultural water
management systems.
2. Train farmers/household members in water harvesting and agricultural
water management technologies.
3. Facilitate the construction of water harvesting structures at household
and community levels.
4. Introduce and promote in-situ rainwater harvesting technologies (e.g.
Conservation agriculture)

4.1.3 Component 3: Improved Food Storage and Distribution

Development issues:

 High post-harvest losses along the value chain.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

26

 Low integration of agricultural commodity markets
 Inadequate cold storage and cool trucks for perishable produce
 Inadequate agro-processing industries

4.1.3.1
Output 1: Post harvest losses for staple food crops (such as
maize,
rice,
sorghum,
cassava,
potatoes
and
beans),
horticultural crops, livestock and fish value chains reduced by
30 percent by 2025.

Actions:

1. Invest in improved appropriate storage facilities and technologies along
the value chain.
2. Promote small scale agro-processing industries in rural areas.
3. Train producers, processers and marketers in post-harvest management.
4. Provide regular market information (deficit/surplus areas) to improve
distribution of agricultural commodities/food stuffs.
5. Facilitate establishment of market centres in rural areas with the
appropriate infrastructure.
6. Link Region and District by feeder roads to various market centres and
highways.

4.1.3.2
Output 2: Private sector capacity enhanced to store 5000 Mt
of grain annually and to process and package 50 percent of
cereals, cassava and sorghum products annually by 2025.

Actions:

1. Strengthen and link the smallholder farmers to the Warehouse Receipt
System (WRS) in the grain supply chain.
2. Rehabilitate existing warehouses and silos and establish Public-Private-
Partnerships.
3. Support private sector to invest in food processing as well as value
addition, including packaging and branding.
4. Facilitate linkages with relevant service providers and markets (inputs
and outputs).

4.1.4 Component 4: Increased Growth of Incomes

Development issues:

 Low levels of income from food and cash crop production by smallholder
farmers (men, women and youth).
 Low productivity of animal breeds and low production of improved
breeds to meet demand.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

27

 High levels of animal diseases and inadequate feed and water for
animals.
 Limited market linkages for livestock and livestock products.
 Low production of aquaculture to meet the increasing demand.
 Limited adoption of integrated farming production systems with
potential high incomes.
 Limited access to input and output markets.
 Potential for urban and peri-urban agriculture as a source of food and
income is under exploited.

4.1.4.1
Output 1: Income from food and cash crop production by men
and women increased by 20 percent and 30 percent,
respectively by 2025.

Actions

1. Build capacity of nursery operators in all crop growing areas and support
them to expand and improve quality of seedlings.
2. Build capacity of Quality Declared Seed producers and support them to
expand and improve quality of seed.
3. Build capacity of food and cash crop farmers to improve productivity and
produce quality.
4. Facilitate contractual arrangements between food and cash crop
producers and market/industry.
5. Develop and promote innovative micro-financing packages to facilitate
food and cash crop farmers to access credit.

4.1.4.2
Output 2: Income from livestock production by men and women
increased by 20 percent and 25 percent respectively by 2025.
Actions

1. Rehabilitate, restock and build capacity of livestock breeding centres to
produce improved breeds of livestock.
2. Facilitate and support the acquisition of improved breeding stocks by
men and women farmers.
3. Provide adequate and effective extension knowledge and agro-weather
information.
4. Strengthen and/or establish efficient and sustainable animal health and
artificial insemination services.
5. Develop and support innovative micro-financing packages to support
livestock keepers’ access to credit and markets.
6. Identify areas with acute problem of water for livestock and construct
water infrastructures.
7. Facilitate improvement of demarcated grazing lands.
8. Promote use of crop residues and agro-industry byproducts.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

28

9. Promote value addition for livestock products.

4.1.4.3
Output 3: Income from aquaculture production by men and women
increased by 20 percent by 2025.

Actions
1. Facilitate and support acquisition of fingerlings by men and women fish
farmers.
2. Promote value addition for fish products.
3. Facilitate contractual arrangements between fish farmers and market.
4. Establish and support innovative micro-financing packages to support
fisherfolks access to credit.

4.1.4.4
Output 4: Output for Urban and peri-urban agriculture increased by
30 percent by 2025.

Actions

1. Support Local Governments to identify and demarcate potential areas
within urban and peri-urban areas for agricultural activities.
2. Train urban and peri-urban producers in CSA Practices.
3. Monitor the safety of outputs from urban and peri-urban agriculture.
4. Enforce laws and bylaws related to urban and peri-urban sustainable
land use.

4.2
Result Area 2: Building resilience and associated mitigation co-
benefits

4.2.1 Component 1: Improve soil health, and restore degraded lands

Development issues:

 Land degradation
 Soil and water conservation.
 Soil erosion and nutrient depletion
 Loss of biodiversity
 Low capacity at all levels for implementation CSA and SLM practices
 Low adoption of CSA and SLM technologies and practices at community
level
 Most CSA and SLM activities are of pilot in nature
 Weak collaboration of relevant ministries and agencies to ensure CSA
and SLM up scaling.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

29

4.2.1.1
Output 1: Adoption of sustainable climate smart technologies and
sustainable land management practices by 5 million households by
2025.
Actions

1. Promote integrated soil fertility and water management interventions.
2. Establish CSA/SLM knowledge hubs across the country to support
adoption of CSA and SLM technologies and practices by men and women
that improve soil health and restore degraded lands.
3. Enhance the capacities of private sector service providers and farmer-
based
organizations
to
support
farmers’
adoption
of
existing/new/improved CSA and SLM technologies and practices.
4. Develop and integrate CSA and SLM principles into farmer-field schools,
primary, secondary and tertiary curriculum.
5. Establish mechanisms for joint planning and implementation of CSA and
SLM at the local level.

4.2.1.2
Output 2: Technology dissemination and adoption for scaling up of
CSA and SLM promoted by 2025.
Actions:

1. Develop and implement sustained awareness creation program on CSA
and SLM in addressing soil health and land degradation challenges.
2. Facilitate the development and implementation of at least five (5) small
scale CSA Projects annually.
3. Facilitate the dissemination and adoption of CSA and SLM technologies
and practices at the farm level across the country through Local
Government’s CSA Projects.

4.2.1.3
Output 3: CSA and SLM knowledge to support policy and investment
decision making generated and adequately managed by 2025
Actions

1. Establish CSA/SLM Knowledge Platform with disaggregated data on men
and women.
2. Document and publicize successful CSA/SLM technologies, practices and
interventions.

4.2.2 Component 2: Conservation of Natural Resources and Catchments

Development issues:
 High Deforestation and Forest Degradation
 Poor Natural forest management  including low adoption of Participatory
Forest Management
 Low Forest Plantation area to meet the high wood demand

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

30

 Low adoption of Agroforestry/Community Forestry
 Extensive Land degradation, Soil erosion and siltation
 High loss of natural and agro- biodiversity
 Unsustainable Biomass Energy Production and use

4.2.2.1
Output 1: The National REDD+ Strategy implemented in 25 percent
of Natural forests in the country by 2025

Actions

1. Upscale Natural Forest Conservation through Participatory Forest
Management (PFM)
2. Protect
water
catchment
areas
through
integrated
watershed
management.
3. Increase forest cover through natural regeneration, Agroforestry,
Reforestation. and Afforestation.
4. Promote best management practices for natural resources management
to improve and maximize net benefits for the farmers and other
downstream users (e.g. power generation and urban water supply).
5. Promote and support on farm soil conservation activities
6. Promote sustainable production and marketing of charcoal from miombo
woodlands
7. Promote sustainable land use management.

4.2.2.2
Output 2: Farm/community forest cover increased by 20 percent by
2025

Actions

1. Develop a business model for ecosystem management in order to
facilitate payment for ecosystem services (e.g. tourism revenue used to
motivate farmers to conserve wildlife and payment for water in urban
areas used to pay farmers for conservation of water catchments).
2. Develop and implement management plans for ecosystems in order to
encourage sustainable use
3. Document biodiversity in the ecosystems including below ground
biodiversity and develop eco-tourism opportunities in such areas
4. Undertake natural resources accounting for ecosystem services.
5. Identify agroforestry species for different agro-ecological zones and
support farmers to increase tree cover
6. Undertake afforestation and reforestation through Public-Private
Partnerships.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

31

4.2.3 Component 3: Insurance and Other Safety Nets

Development issues:

 Vulnerability and increasing risks to climate change.
 Shifting spatial distribution of events
 High incidence of poverty making it difficult for small scale farmers to
recover after experiencing extreme weather events and climate
variability
 Inadequacy of traditional approaches to risk transfer and risk
management.

4.2.3.1
Output 1: Crop and livestock weather-indexed insurance increased
by 30 percent by 2025.
Actions

1. Develop and implement varied innovative crop and livestock weather-
indexed insurance packages.
2. Develop agro-meteorological infrastructure to support weather-indexed
insurance and to use them for improved weather and climate
information services for farmers.
3. Enhance the capacity of micro-finance institutions to act as agents to
deliver innovative crop and livestock weather-indexed insurance
packages.
4. Raise awareness within the insurance industry of extreme weather and
climate risks and communicate actions and opportunities.
5. Undertake farmer education to address their concerns regarding
insurance products with a view to gain their trust
6. Establish livestock insurance schemes and use of insured livestock as
collateral
7. Explore ways of using existing and other safety nets such as cash
transfers or workfare programmes.

4.2.4 Component 4: Early Warning System and Emergency Preparedness

Development issues:

 Susceptibility of crops, livestock and fisheries to extreme weather
events, pests and diseases.
 Fragmented and inefficient early warning systems.
 Inadequate systems, knowledge and capacity at household, LGAs and
national levels to respond to emergencies.
 Lack of contingency plans at district level.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

32

4.2.4.1
Output 1: A Comprehensive Early Warning System and Contingency
Plan developed and implemented by 2017
Actions:

1. Prepare vulnerability maps for targeting food security and emergency
preparedness interventions.
2. Develop tools to support vulnerable households and communities to
establish household community systems that can respond to emergencies
(with regards to food insecurity)
3. Monitor crops, livestock and fish pests and diseases.
4. Integrate scientific weather forecasting and indigenous knowledge for
early warning and to inform farmer decisions.
5. Establish a National Seed Emergency stock.
6. Improve EWS messages (clear, consistent) that include risk information;
designed to link threat levels.
7. Capacity development to farmers on early warning systems and
emergency preparedness.
8. Improve mass delivery system particularly on content development and
communication channels.
9. Establish a feedback and evaluation process of messages delivered.
10. Develop
an
effective
frame-work
for
collaboration
emergency
communication centres/stakeholders.
11. The explicit development of contingency plans on district level is not
mentioned as an activity.

4.2.5 Component 5: Synergies in adaptation and mitigation enhanced

Development issues:

 Agriculture sector is a source of GHG emissions
 Some adaptation actions have mitigation as co-benefits
 Increased soil carbon has beneficial effects on soil fertility

4.2.5.1
Output 1: Reduction of GHG emissions intensity from the agriculture
sector
Actions

1. Promote adoption of low cost climate smart technologies that minimize
emission of carbon dioxide and enhance soil carbon sequestration.
2. Develop a national carbon accounting and measurement, reporting and
verification system.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

33

4.3
Result Area 3: Value Chain Integration

4.3.1 Component 1: Value addition process for agricultural products

Development issues:

 Most agricultural commodities are sold on the farm as a result the
quality is compromised and the farmers obtain low prices.
 Most of agricultural produce are sold raw and thus bulky with short shelf
lives.
  Lack of supportive infrastructure for agricultural value chain.
 Disjointed value chains with regards to most agricultural commodities.

4.3.1.1
Output 1: At least two new commercially viable products
developed from each of the staple crops, horticultural crops,
livestock and fisheries by 2025.

Actions

1. Solicit funds for research and innovation into agricultural value chains.
2. Develop improved infrastructure for agricultural value chains. .
3. Institute competitive grant scheme for agriculture value chains.
4. Identify existing value addition technologies and incentivize the private
sector to promote them.

4.3.1.2
Output 2: Efficient pilot value chains developed for two selected
commodities in each agro-ecological zone.

Actions

1. Establish regional hubs (a cluster of livelihood zones in the same AEZ) for
value chain development and backstopping.
2. Identify and build capacity of actors in value chain processes.
3. Undertake advanced market feasibility studies to promote demand for
the selected commodities.
4. Facilitate linkages to markets for the selected commodities.

4.3.2 Component 2: Increased competitiveness and enhanced integration
into domestic, regional and international markets

Development issues

 Low levels of local market penetration by smallholder men and women
farmers.
 Low capitalization of bulk traders.
 Poor grading and standardization system.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

34

 High consumer preference of imported commodities that have local
substitutes.
 Inadequate volumes with the required specifications and quality to
supply the international market.
 Limited capacity to fully comply with international sanitary and
phytosanitary (SPS) standards.

4.3.2.1
Output 1: Marketed output of food and cash crops, livestock and
fish products by smallholders increased by 50 percent by 2025.
Actions:

1. Create agricultural, livestock and fish commodity hubs through
participation of private sector especially micro-financiers and apply
viable models of linkage with smallholders.
2. Facilitate capacity building of farmers on demand- and market-driven
production.
3. Design and launch a market promotion program for import substitution
commodities.
4. Work with supermarkets, hotels and restaurants to participate in
selected commodity value chains with a smallholder production base.

4.3.2.2
Output 2: Export of non-traditional agricultural commodities by
men and women smallholders increased by 50 percent by 2025
Actions:

1. Identify successful lead private sector firms with access to assured
markets and apply viable models of linkage with smallholders.
2. Design sustainable programmes to support the certification of
smallholders for export markets.
3. Develop branding of Tanzania produce for regional and international
markets.

4.3.2.3
Output 3: Grading and standardization systems of agricultural
commodities (crops, livestock and fish) developed and improved.
Actions:

1. Develop
grading
and
standardization
systems
for
agricultural
commodities that do not have grades and standards
2. Promote the adoption of grading and standardization systems for all
agricultural commodities for both domestic and export markets.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

35

4.4
Result Area 4: Research for Development and Innovations

4.4.1 Component 1:
Agricultural research
funding and Uptake of
Agricultural Technologies and Innovations along the Value Chain

Development issues:
 Low public expenditure funding into agricultural research.
 Limited participation of private sector in funding agricultural research
and innovations.
 Poor
dissemination
and
management
of
agricultural
research
information.
 Poor coordination and collaboration among the institutions involved in
research.

4.4.1.1
Output 1: Increased funding in research and development and
innovations by 50percent by 2025.

Actions:

1. Increase public expenditure into research and development and
innovations through national budget.
2. Incentivize private sector investments in research and development and
innovations.

4.4.1.2
Output 2: Adoption of improved CSA technologies and
practices by men and women along the value chain increased
by 30 percent by 2025.

Actions

1. Conduct participatory research work on improved technologies and
practices that is informed by needs of users and agro-ecological zones
along the value chain.
2. Conduct on-farm research into low-cost appropriate technologies and
practices and deliver them as packages.
3. Build the capacity of extension, producers and other stakeholders in the
use of existing/new/improved CSA technologies and practices.
4. Support development of private sector input and appropriate CSA
technologies outreach and distribution networks.
5. Intensify field demonstration/field days/study tours to enhance adoption
of existing/new/improved CSA technologies and practices.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

36

4.4.2 Component 2: Research Extension Linkage strengthened and made
functional by 2018

Development issues:

 Poor management and sharing of agricultural research information.
 Poor packaging of research information for the benefit of farmers.
 Lack of appropriate platforms for researchers and farmers to interact
and share knowledge and experiences.

4.4.2.1
Output 1: Research Extension Linkage and made functional by
2018

Actions:

1. Establish a platform through which researchers will have regular
contacts with stakeholders and other users at the national, local and
farm levels.
2. Prepare CSA information packages and disseminate them to interested
stakeholders using ICT.

4.5
Result Area 5: CSA Knowledge, Extension and Agro-weather Services

4.5.1 Component 1: CSA knowledge generation and dissemination

Development issue

 Fragmented CSA knowledge and understanding of what CSA is.
 Lack of CSA knowledge Management System across the country.

4.5.1.1
Output
1:
Robust
CSA
Knowledge
Management
System
(Platform/Hub) across the country
Actions

1. Undertake a CSA knowledge mapping, audit and analysis.
2. Build CSA knowledge Resource Centre.
3. Develop and maintain a robust and functional CSA knowledge
management system.
4. Build capacity to different stakeholders in the agricultural value chain at
the national and local levels.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

37

4.5.1.2
Output 2: Synthesis reports and case studies on CSA best approaches
and guidelines prepared and disseminated

Actions:

1. Undertake analyses and provide tools to support CSA decision-making.
2. Bundle and provide synthesized information on CSA approaches and case
studies on CSA best approaches.
3. Develop and test CSA guidelines and decision-making support tools.

4.5.1.3
Output 3: Multimedia CSA knowledge products, training and
communications packages produced
Actions:
1. Produce regular CSA information and communication materials for
influential stakeholders to support and inform policies, planning and
agricultural advisory services.
2. Produce CSA information and communication materials to strengthen
capacity of researchers, private sector, CSOs and farmer organizations to
influence policy and decision makers.
3. Develop practical guides and applied training materials and packages for
training on best practices for CSA.

4.4.5.4
Output 4: CSA knowledge networks and partnerships strengthened

Actions:
1. Strengthen CSA knowledge and information sharing networks/forums.
2. Develop a portfolio of information sharing technology tools to support
sharing of CSA information and learning resources.
3. Establish CSA knowledge partnerships on knowledge generation, sharing
and
mobilization
with
governments,
international
organizations,
research institutions, farmer organizations, private sector and civil
society organizations.

4.5.2 Component 2: Enhance extension, climate information services and
agro- weather advisories

Development issues
 Low use of climate information services and agro-weather advisories in
agricultural planning and farm management decision making (Highly
inadequate agro-climate information services and inappropriate agro-
weather products)
 Low reliability and availability of climate information

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

38

 Role of climate change and weather variability in the increased post-
harvest losses, and increased energy use, along value chains are not
clearly known
 Low integration of climate research with agricultural research,
 Poor knowledge on weather data processing, packaging and timely
dissemination.

4.5.2.1
Output 1: Agro-climate information services and timely-use of agro-
weather products increased by 40 percent by 2025.
Actions:

1. Identify appropriate climate/weather services and products for small
scale farmers
2. Apply user friendly software such as INSTAT to generate products for improving
smallholder decision making.
3. Promote integrated weather observation for improving availability and
reliability of climate information.
4. Digitize historical climate data to enhance availability and accessibility of
climate information.
5. Downscaling forecasted weather to various localities to promote the
appropriate climate/weather services and products for small scale farmers, and
pre-season dissemination of agro weather advisories
6. In-season community agro-weather monitoring and post-season agro-
weather review
7. Upscale the mobile phone based early warning system.
8. Strengthen integration of climate research with agricultural research
9. Training of Regional Coordinators on CSA

4.6
Result Area 6: Improved Institutional Coordination

4.6.1 Component 1: Improve Inter-Ministerial and Local Government
Coordination

Development issue:
 Inadequate inter-ministerial coordination including collaboration with
PMO Disaster Management Department.
 Inadequate coordination between national and local governments on
agriculture related issues.
 Low capacity for cross-sectoral planning.
 Ineffective communication within and between ministries.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

39

4.6.1.1
Output 1: A joint platform for collaboration between ministries
responsible agriculture, livestock, fisheries, environment, forestry,
water, finance and planning established and strengthened by end of
2015.
Actions:

1. Develop and implement an inter-ministerial communications strategy
with respect to inter-ministerial coordination on matters relating to
climate smart agriculture.
2. Introduce a biannual joint planning and review session between inter-
ministerial team and the country government officials responsible for
agriculture.
3. Train national and local government staff in cross-sectoral planning and
implementation.
4. Build policy review and analytical capacity at the national and local
levels.
5. Strengthen the planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation at
the national and local levels.
6. Establish a framework for disseminating CSA programmatic planning and
implementation as well as annual reports and studies and receiving
feedback at national and local levels.

4.6.2 Component 2: Partnerships with private sector and civil society
organizations

Development issue:

 Lack of structured framework for private sector and CSOs to engage
national and local governments on CSA issues.
 Inadequate incentives for private sector to invest in CSA.

4.6.2.1
Output 1: A platform for private sector and CSOs engagement with
national and local governments established and strengthened by end
of 2017.
Actions:

1. Engage private sector to identify opportunities for increased investments
in CSA.
2. Organize regular consultative meetings with private sector and CSOs on
the planning and implementation of the CSA Program.
3. Identify appropriate incentives to catalyze private sector and CSO
investments in CSA activities.
4. Publicize the Country CSA Program to private sector and CSOs with a
view to identifying areas for their participation.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

40

5. Establish communication channels for consultations between private
sector and CSOs in the programmatic planning and implementation of
CSA activities at the national and local levels

4.6.3 Component 3: Programmatic Coordination with Development Partners
strengthened

Development issue:

 Fragmented projects/programmes on CSA or CSA-related initiatives.
 Varied financial management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation
systems.
 Weak ownership of intervention at the national and local levels.

4.6.3.1
Output
1:
GoT
–
Development
Partner
Coordination
and
Collaboration strengthened and Development Partners fund a
common Country CSA Program by end of 2015
Actions:

1. Harmonize GoT and development partners’ investments in climate smart
agriculture through a common Country (National) CSA Program.
2. Strengthen collaboration between GoT and the Development Partners’
Agriculture Coordination Group (with a standing agenda item
programmatic planning and implementation of CSA Program).

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

41

5.0
COORDINATION FRAMEWORK

5.1
Institutional Arrangements

The National Climate Change Technical Committee (NCCTC) and National
Climate Change Steering Committee (NCCSC) will guide the coordination and
implementation of the CSA Program. The NCCTC shall provide technical advice
to the National Climate Change Focal Point (NCCFP) in the Vice President’s
Office – Division of Environment, while the NCCSC shall provide policy guidance
and ensure coordination of Programmatic Result Areas as well as cross-sectorial
participation.

The MAFC Environment Management Unit (EMU) will be the implementation
Sector focal point for the Country CSA Program. In that case Head of EMU is
responsible and accountable for ensuring the smooth implementation of the
Country CSA Program. The main constraint is that EMU does not currently have
a budget allocation for climate change activities including CSA.

The National Climate Smart Agriculture Task Force (NCSATF) formed under the
EAC directives with a broad range of government and non-governmental
stakeholders will have an overall responsibility for coordination and delivery of
the expected Programmatic Result Areas outcomes. Hence, NCSATF will
monitor implementation of the Country CSA Program, serve as a vital
coordination function between MAFC, MDAs, NSAs, and regional entities such as
the EAC, SADC, COMESA and issue directives to all relevant MAFC departments
and units for implementing Programmatic Result Areas.

5.2
Coordination of Activities

Coordination mechanism of different activities that will be implemented by
different sectors involved in the promotion of CSA practices is highlighted in
Figure 10.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

42

Figure 14: Coordination mechanism among the different implementers of
CSA practices

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

43

6.0
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF DIFFERENT SECTORS

The implementing partners of the Country CSA Program will have different
roles and responsibilities as highlighted in the following table:

6.1
MAFC and MANR Divisions and Units

All MAFC and MANR Divisions/Units will be instrumental in implementing the
Country CSA Program as well, and include technical and research units at the
national and sub-national levels. Of particular importance is the Department of
Policy and Planning (DPP) under MFC– as the entity with responsibility for
strategic planning and policy development, will need to assist with ensuring
that resources are allocated for the program implementation. The ICT unit will
have a key role in managing the developed ACRP website where all the
information
and
communication-
on
CSA
will
be
done.
Technical
divisions/departments will have a key role in implementing Programmatic
Result Areas. Importantly MAFC will work closely with major agricultural
programmes and initiatives related to agriculture as well as climate change,
including the ASDP-2 Secretariat, the Big Results Now Presidential Delivery
Bureau- and the SAGCOT Centre to promote the implementation of the
Programmatic Result Areas. Large agriculture programmes and initiatives are
well placed to promote climate resilience, pilot innovations, and reduce the
environmental impacts of the sector that can drive climate vulnerability.

6.2
Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs)

Several other MDAs are linked with agricultural activities and necessary for
implementation of CSA activities for building resilience in the agriculture
sector. MAFC will be responsible for forging links with these MDAs and
incentives to coordinate. It will be important for other sectors with linked
activities to coordinate with MAFC, as their action plans are developed to
identify opportunities to link activities, since climate change is an issue that
cuts across sectors.

6.3
Non-State Actors

Non-State Actors, including research institutions, universities, the private
sector, NGO and CSOs, and Development Partners include key stakeholders that
can contribute to fulfilling research needs, providing financial resources, and
technical assistance toward implementation of the Country CSA Program. MAFC
will need to coordinate closely especially with NGOs who are working in the
field and are on the front line of practices that can be scaled up with
additional support.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

44

6.4
Sub-National Entities

Sub-national entities will be key recipients of Programmatic Result Areas,
including training, finance, and technical assistance, but much of the Result
Areas implementation will rest at the sub-national level as well. Entities such
as District-level Local Government Authorities, District Irrigation Development
Teams, Zonal Plant Health Centres, regional Agricultural Research Institutes,
and River Basin Offices will all play a role in each of the Programmatic Result
Areas actions.

Table 6: Roles and Responsibilities of Different Sectors
ORGANIZATION/
STAKEHOLDER
ROLES/
RESPONSIBILITY
COMPARATIVE
ADVANTAGE
TARGET
WHAT THEY
CAN DO FOR
CSA COUNTRY
PROGRAMME
VPO / 1st VP
(Zanzibar)
 Climate Change
Focal Point
 Climate Change
Expertise
 Climate
Change
adaptation
and
mitigation
 Technical
support by
Climate
Change
Secretariat
MAFC
 Coordination
 Monitoring and
Evaluation
 Technical
Expertise
 Productivity
and food
security
 Technical
and financial
support
 Monitoring
and
Evaluation
MANR (Zanzibar)
 Co-coordination
 Technical
Expertise
 Productivity
and food
security
 Technical
and financial
support
National Climate
Smart Agriculture
Taskforce (NCSATF)
 Solicit funds,
information sharing
 Technical
Expertise
 Climate
Smart
Agriculture
adoption
 Mainstreamin
g and
adoption
MoF
 Climate financing
 Financial
Expertise
 Climate
finance
 Technical
and financial
support
MNRT, MLFD, PMO-
RALG, NEMC, TMA,
MITM, MoW, MEM,
Planning Commission,
MLHHS,
 Policy formulation,
capacity building,
monitoring and
evaluation,
technical
backstopping on
CSA
- Technical
Expertise
- Physical and
financial
resources
 Service
provision, CC
adaptation
and
mitigation
 Enabling
environment
Regional Secretariat
 Coordination  of
LGAs
 Linkage between
Sector Ministries
and LGAs
 Monitoring and
evaluation
 Coordination
mechanism
 Provide
linkage
 Coordination
and
reporting
LGAs
 Policies /
strategies /
programmes
 Nationwide
coverage in
implementation
 Adoption of
CSA
technologies
 Dissemination

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

45

ORGANIZATION/
STAKEHOLDER
ROLES/
RESPONSIBILITY
COMPARATIVE
ADVANTAGE
TARGET
WHAT THEY
CAN DO FOR
CSA COUNTRY
PROGRAMME
implementers
 Formulation of by -
laws
and practices
Research Institutions
/ Academia
 Research and
technology
development
 High tertiary level
Training (short and
long-term)
 Scientific
knowledge
management
 Scientific
expertise
 Training
capacity
 Access to new
scientific
knowledge
 Infrastructure
 International
collaboration
 Identification
and
development
of
sustainable
CSA
technologies
 Research on
improving
CSA
technologies

 Technology
evaluation,
improvement
and
validation,
 Disseminatio
n of
innovative
CSA
technologies
to different
to agro-
ecological
zones
NGOs, CBOs, FBOs
 Dissemination of
CSA extension
packages/
awareness raising
 Close to the
community,
lobbying and
advocacy on CSA
related matters
 Adoption of
CSA
technologies
and
practices,
awareness
creation
 Dissemination

Private Sector (TCCIA,
ANSAF, etc.)
 Resource
mobilization
 Entrepreneursh
ip investment
facility, input
supply, credit
facility
 Investment
and business
opportunities
 Financial
support
Development Partners   Resource
mobilization,
technical
assistance
 Technical
expertise
 Financial
resources
 Climate
Change
adaptation
and
mitigation
 Financial and
technical
support
Regional initiatives
(CCAFS, COMESA, EAC
and SADC)
 Resource
mobilization,
technical
assistance
 Technical
expertise
 Financial
resources
 Climate
Change
adaptation
and
mitigation
 Financial and
technical
support

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

46

7.0
MONITORING AND EVALUATION

Participatory Monitoring and Evaluation (PM&E) framework that ensures the
project targets are met and learning achieved will be an emphasis of the
proposed investment plan. Capacity building in PM&E and mentoring process
for site team and other core members will be done in each target area. The
process will include participatory monitoring and tracking of major outcomes
for each specific objective. The PM&E will serve several functions such as
tracking progress, learning and change as well as collecting data for answering
key questions, and for project management. Technical and financial reports
will be delivered on an agreed-upon schedule to communicate progress to the
different stakeholders. The reporting framework including the content of
reports, frequency of submission, responsible parties and target recipients will
be developed and agreed between parties involved. As mentioned in the
previous sections this is a multi-partner programme involving the central
government,
local
government,
private
sector
and
non-governmental
organisations. The tools for M&E will include the programme log frame and
annual work plan and budget. Audit of project activities constitutes part of
M&E system. Activity Based Result framework is attached as annex VII.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

47

8.0
TEN - YEAR PROGRAMME FINANCING FRAMEWORK

The CSA programme document is mainly intended to be a guiding document
that will be used to leverage financial support from the Government of
Tanzania and various Development Partners. It is in particular anticipated that
most of the activities will carried out as separate projects with detailed
operationalization narratives and budgets. Prior to, and during the
Stakeholders’ Validation workshop, different Development Partners have
expressed interest in funding various components depending on their priorities.
As such the document therefore broadly identify focus areas where funding
during the next 10-years should be directed.

The sustainability of CSA programme is mainly based on the premise that
activities under different focus areas will be mainstreamed in various plans of
the different ministries and other stakeholders.

8.1
Cost Estimates and indicative Financing Plan

Table 7 shows cost estimates of US $32.158 Million projected over ten years in
nominal terms. Budget for first three years are higher due the needed
investment in terms of infrastructure and equipment. However, this figure is
only indicative and does not prescribe a limit.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

48

Table: 7. Summary of CSA Cost Estimates for 10 Years
Yr 1
Yr 2
Yr 3
Yr 4
Yr 5
Yr 6
Yr 7
Yr 8
Yr 9
Yr 10
Total
A: Investment
2,250,000
1,110,000
1,610,000
930,000
400,000
250,000
250,000
250,000
0
0
5,300,000
B: Components
1.1  Improved productivity and nutrition
650,000
680,000
680,000
530,000
490,000
450,000
395,000
395,000
395,000
395,000
5,060,000
1.2  Irrigation and water management
295,000
295,000
260,000
200,000
200,000
170,000
170,000
170,000
170,000
155,000
2,085,000
1.3  Improved Food Storage and Distribution
222,000
222,000
222,000
222,000
222,000
157,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
1,447,000
1.4  Increased Growth of Incomes
540,000
540,000
540,000
495,000
460,000
285,000
240,000
240,000
240,000
240,000
3,820,000
2.1 Improve soil health and restore degraded
lands
270,000
270,000
220,000
165,000
165,000
135,000
135,000
135,000
135,000
135,000
1,765,000
2.2 Conservation of Natural Resources and
Catchments
186,000
186,000
186,000
149,000
164,000
134,000
134,000
134,000
134,000
134,000
1,541,000
2.3 Insurance and Other Safety Nets
125,000
125,000
131,000
51,000
51,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
708,000
2.4 Early Warning System and Emergency
Preparedness
188,000
188,000
108,000
58,000
58,000
48,000
48,000
48,000
48,000
48,000
840,000
2.5 Synergies in adaptation and mitigation
enhanced
60,000
60,000
60,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
460,000
3.1 Development of new agricultural products
100,000
100,000
100,000
60,000
60,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
510,000
3.2 Increased competitiveness and enhanced
integration into domestic, regional and
international markets
145,000
145,000
84,000
56,000
56,000
56,000
56,000
56,000
56,000
56,000
766,000
4.1 Agricultural research funding and Uptake of
Agricultural Technologies and Innovations along
the Value Chain
304,000
304,000
304,000
269,000
269,000
215,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
2,065,000
4.2 Research Extension Linkage strengthened
and made functional by 2018
65,000
65,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
410,000
5.1 CSA knowledge generation and
dissemination
138,000
173,000
133,000
133,000
98,000
98,000
98,000
98,000
98,000
98,000
1,165,000
5.2 Enhance extension, climate information
services and agro- weather advisories
325,000
325,000
325,000
325,000
280,000
185,000
185,000
145,000
145,000
145,000
2,385,000
6.1 Improve Inter-Ministerial and Local
Government Coordination
245,000
245,000
205,000
130,000
130,000
130,000
130,000
130,000
130,000
130,000
955,000
6.2 Partnerships with private sector and civil
society organizations
163,000
163,000
85,000
55,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
496,000
6.3 Programmatic Coordination with
Development Partners strengthened
76,000
76,000
76,000
76,000
76,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
380,000
GRAND TOTAL
6,347,000
5,272,000
5,364,000
3,979,000
3,284,000
2,521,000
2,194,000
2,154,000
1,904,000
1,889,000
32,158,000
BASE COSTS IN US$
Summary Cost by Component

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

49

ANNEXES

Annex I: Tanzania Map

Tanzania showing regional and international boundaries

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

50

Annex IIa: Tanzania Agricultural Zones
Zone
Sub-Zone and areas
Soils and Topography
Altitude
(m)
Rainfall
(mm/yr)
Growing
season
COAST
North: Tanga (except
Lushoto), Coast and Dar-
es- Salaam
Infertile sands on gently rolling
uplands, Alluvial soils in Rufiji,
Sand and infertile soils
Under
3000
North:
Bimodal, 750-
1200mm
October-
December
and March-
June
South: Eastern Lindi and
Mtwara (except Makonde
Plateau)
Fertile clays on uplands and
river flood plains

South:
Unimodal, 800-
1200mm
December-
April
ARID LANDS
North: Serengeti,
Ngorongoro Parks, Part of
Masai land
North: Volcanic ash and
sediments. Soils variable in
texture and very susceptible to
water erosion
1300-
1800
North:
Unimodal,
unreliable,
500-600mm
March- May
Masai Steppe, Tarangire
Park, Mkomazi Reserve,
Pangani and Eastern
Dodoma
South: Rolling plains of low
fertility.  Susceptible to water
erosion. Pangani river flood
plain with saline, alkaline soil
500-1500
South:
Unimodal and
Unreliable,
400-600mm

SEMI-ARID
LANDS
Central Dodoma, Singida,
Northern Iringa, some of
Arusha, Shinyanga
Central: Undulating plains with
rocky hills and low scarps.  Well
drained soils with low fertility.
Alluvial hardpan and saline soils
in Eastern Rift Valley and lake
Eyasi. Black cracking soils in
Shinyanga.
1000-
1500
Central:
unimodal and
unreliable:
500-800mm
December -
March

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

51

Zone
Sub-Zone and areas
Soils and Topography
Altitude
(m)
Rainfall
(mm/yr)
Growing
season
Southern: Morogoro
(except Kilombero and
Wami Basins and
UluguruMts).Also Lindi
and Southwest Mtwara
Southern: Flat or undulating
plains with rocky hills,
moderate fertile loams and
clays in South (Morogoro),
infertile sand soils in centre
200-600
South-eastern:
Unimodal 600-
800mm
PLATEAUX
Western: Tabora, Rukwa
(North and Centre),
Mbeya
Western: Wide sandy plains and
Rift Valley scarps
800-1500
Western:
unimodal, 800-
1000mm
November-
April
North: Kigoma, Part of
Mara
Flooded swamps of Malagarasi
and Ugalla rivers have clay soil
with high fertility
1,500-
1,700

Southern: Ruvuma and
Southern Morogoro
Southern: upland plains with
rock hills. Clay soils of low to
moderate fertility in south,
infertile sands in North.
500-
2,000
Southern:
unimodal, very
reliable, 900-
1300mm
SOUTHERN
AND
WESTERN
HIGHLANDS
Southern: A broad ridge
of from N. Morogoro to N.
Lake Nyasa, covering part
of Iringa, Mbeya
Southern: Undulating plains to
dissected hills and mountains.
Moderately fertile clay soils
with volcanic soils in Mbeya
1200-
1500
Unimodal,
reliable, local
rain shadows,
800-1400
December –
April

South-western: Ufipa
plateau in Sumbawanga
South-western: Undulating
plateau above Rift Valleys and
sand soils of low fertility
1400-
2300
Unimodal,
reliable, 800-
1000
November-
April
Western: Along the shore
of Lake Tanganyika in
Kigoma and Kagera
Western: North-south ridges
separated by swampy valleys,
loam and clay soils of low
fertility in hills, with alluvium
and ponded clays in the valleys
100-1800
Bimodal, 1000-
2000
October-
December
and
February-
May

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

52

Zone
Sub-Zone and areas
Soils and Topography
Altitude
(m)
Rainfall
(mm/yr)
Growing
season
NOTHERN
HIGHLANDS
Northern: foot of Mt.
Kilimanjaro and Mt.
Meru.
Eastern Rift Valley to
Eyasi
Northern: Volcanic uplands,
volcanic soils from lavas and
ash. Deep fertile loams. Soils in
dry areas prone to water
erosion.
1,000-
2,500

Bimodal, varies
widely 1000-
2000
November-
January and
March-June
Granite MtsUluguru in
Morogoro, Pare Mts in
Kilimanjaro and
UsambaraMts in Tanga,
Tarime highlands in Mara
Granite steep Mountain side to
highland plateaux. Soils are
deep, arable and moderately
fertile on upper slopes, shallow
and stony on steep slopes
1,000-
2,000
Bimodal and
very reliable
1000-2000
October-
December
and March-
June
ALLUVIAL
PLAINS
Kilombero (Morogoro)
Cental clay plain with alluvial
fans east and west
750-1200
Unimodal, very
reliable, 900-
1300
November-
April
Rufiji (Coast)

Wide mangrove swamp delta,
alluvial soils, sandy upstream,
loamy down steam in floodplain
<500
Unimodal,
often
inadequate
800-1200
December-
April
Usangu (Mbeya)
Seasonally Flooded clay soils in
North, alluvial fans in South
2,400-
5,000
Unimodal, 500-
800
December-
March
Wami (Morogoro)
Moderately alkaline black soils
in East, alluvial fans with well
drained black loam in West
400-
1,000
Unimodal, 600-
1800
December-
March
Source: Modified from de Pawn, 1984

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

53

Annex IIb: Tanzania Agricultural Map

Source: SUA

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

54

Annex III: Agricultural production
‘000 Metric Tons
Year
2003/0
4
2004/0
5
2005/0
6
2006/0
7
2007/0
8
2008/0
9
2009/1
0
2010/1
1
2011/1
2
2012/1
3
2013/14
*
Maize
3,157
3,219
3,423
3,302
3,556
3,326
4,475
4,341
5,104
5,288
6,734
Sorghum
757
714
712
971
861
709
789
807
839
782
883
Millets

201
221
228
194
203
220
372
312
214
292
363
Rice
688
759
805
872
875
868
1,700
1,461
1,170
1,342
1,681
Wheat

67
102
110
83
92
95
62
113
109
102
167
Pulses
879
886
1,050
1,156
1,126
1,116
1,254
1,632
1,827
1,871
1,697
Cassava
1,480
1,846
2,053
1,733
1,797
1,972
1,464
1,549
1,821
1,878
1,664
Bananas
734
991
1,169
1,028
982
1,073
975
1,048
842
1,317
1,064
Potatoes
874
931
1,396
1,322
1,379
1,392
1,231
1,710
1,418
1,808
1,761

Crop
Metric Tons
2004/05 2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14
Tea
32,000
30,000
34,446
32,698
34,165
33,160
35,000
33,000
33,700
33,000
Sugarcane
229,620
263,317
192,535
265,434
276,605
279,850
317,000 260,055
286,380
293,011
Tobacco
51,970
56,500
65,299
55,567
58,702
60,900
78,000
126,624
74,240
100,000
Cotton
344,210
376,591
130,565
200,662
368,229
267,004
260,000 225,938
351,151
246,767
Pyrethrum 1,000
2,800
1,500
2,800
3,280
3,320
5,000
5,700
6,100
7,000
Sisal
26,800
27,794
30,934
33,039
33,208
26,363
35,000
33,406
23,344
41,104
Coffee
54,000
34,334
48,869
43,000
62,345
40,000
60,575
33,219
71,200
48,599
Cashew
81,600
77,158
92,232
99,107
79,068
74,169
121,070 160,00
121,704
127,939

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

55

Crop
2008/2009
2009/10
2010/11
2011/12
2012/13
2013/14
Fruits
557,400 3,297,910 3,751,170 3,938,730 4,096,280 4,416,690
Vegetables
602,000
766,570
858,740
901,680
937,750 1,005,305
Flower

8,670
9,100
9,850
10,200
10,790
Spices
6,865

7,150
7,370
8,125
8,377

Source: BEST, 2014

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

56

Annex IV: Agriculture Sector Financing Gap (TShs) 2010/2011 – 2014/2015

Annex V: Resource Requirement for Zanzibar

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

57

Annex VI: Wood Fuel Demand and Consumption

Wood Fuel Demand (2012)
Woodfuel
Demand
Firewood
Charcoal
Total
Charcoal &
Firewood in
m3 Fuel
Wood (mi)
Tonnes
(mi)
M3 Fuel
wood (mi)
Tonnes
(mi)
M3 Fuel
wood equiv
(mi)
Rural
20.97
29.96
0.52
3.88
33.83
Urban
1.64
2.34
1.51
11.38
13.72
Total
22.60
32.29
2.03
15.26
47.55
Source: Adapted from BEST, 2014

Tanzania Fuel Wood Consumption by household (2012)
Area
Total Population
percent Population
using wood
No. using wood
Dar es Salaam
4,364,541
3.0 percent
130,936
Other Urban
7,316,739
19 percent
1,381,334
Rural
33,246,720
90.0 percent
29,922,048
Total
44,928,000
70.0 percent
31,434,318
Sources: National Bureau of Statistics 2002 and 2012 Census, and 2007 Household Budget Survey, and Tanzania
Commission for AIDS, Tanzania HIV/AIDS and Malaria Indicator Survey 2011-12 (NBS, 2007, NBS, 2009, NBS, 2013b and
TACACIDS, 2013)

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

58

Annex VII:
Logical Framework Matrix or Program Design Matrix

Verifiable Indicators
Source of Verification
Assumptions
Overall Goal
Tanzania achieves enhanced
sustainable productivity,
climate resilience and food
security for the agricultural
sector growth
CSA Policy index  (CSA-Pol)
CSA Results index (CSA-Res)


Specialized targeted surveys

End of Program evaluation
Report


Available policies to support
CSA

Available services and
infrastructure to support CSA

Governments continue to
support agriculture and
poverty reduction as
priorities

Equitable distribution of
benefits occurs
PDO (Purpose)
The PDO is:
A: Enhanced climate
resilience of agricultural and
food systems
B: CSA Program - Strengthens
policy, legal and institutional
framework
to
increase
efficiency
and
effective
implementation
of
climate
smart agriculture
C: Enhance collaboration in
CSA related activities among
ministries,
agencies
institutions and private sector
service providers

% of  farming communities
practicing CSA (disaggregated by
gender)
Rate of change of adoption of
sustainable climate smart
technologies and sustainable land
management practices
(disaggregated by type) – (in %)
Rate of increase in CSA information
and knowledge transfer  among
stakeholders
Rate for adaptation to climate
change and variability


End of Program evaluation
Report

Mid-Term Reports

Quarterly Reports

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

59

Verifiable Indicators
Source of Verification
Assumptions
Tanzania CSA programs
accesses climate financing
and uses it effectively to
support climate  change
resilience and low carbon
sustainable growth

Level of stakeholder satisfaction with
the CSA technologies and innovations
(%) by number of products users (by
gender, age, and location)
Transparent national Climate Change
financing mechanism established
Intermediate Outcomes
Component 1: Improved Productivity and incomes

CSA Program has enhanced
use of climate-smart
agricultural practices,
promoting improved land
management and sustainable
crop-livestock and fisheries
intensification

New CSA practices developed
relative to plan (%)
Number of Sustainable CSA
technologies adopted by smallholder
farmers
Increased annual yields of targeted
crops (such as maize, rice, sorghum,
cassava, potatoes and beans,
aquaculture  and livestock
Percent of farmers using improved
inputs.
Number of extension officers and
management of Irrigators

Evaluation Reports

Annual Reports

Communication priority
setting document

Annual survey reports.

Mid Term Reports

Review Missions
Implementation support
Reports



Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

60

Verifiable Indicators
Source of Verification
Assumptions
Organization trained.
Number of farmers trained on
irrigation technologies
% increase in irrigated land
Number of irrigation schemes
constructed to its full potentiality.
% increase in Income from crop,
livestock, aquaculture production by
men and women
Component 2:  Building resilience and associated mitigation co-benefits

Strengthened policy, legal and
institutional framework to
increase efficiency and
effective implementation of
climate smart agriculture in
identified priority areas.
Number of evidence based policy
responses to food insecurity adopted
Number of established CSA/SLM
Knowledge Platforms with
disaggregated data on men and
women.
Number of villages with land use
plan.
Number of small scale CSA projects
implemented annually.
% change in Farm/community forest
cover

Quarterly Reports

Annual survey reports.

Evaluation Reports

CSA Program Annual Reports

Specialized survey Reports

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

61

Verifiable Indicators
Source of Verification
Assumptions
Rate of Adoption of sustainable
climate smart technologies and
sustainable land management
practices
Number of generated CSA and SLM
knowledge to support policy and
investment decision making
% change in Crop and livestock
weather-indexed insurance
Reduction of GHG emissions intensity
from the agriculture sector (%)

Component 3:     Value Chain Integration

Availability of infrastructure
to support value addition,
marketing, trade and
postharvest management.

Number of  new commercially viable
products developed from each of the
staple crops, horticultural crops,
livestock and fisheries
Number of Efficient pilot value
chains developed for  selected
commodities in each agro-ecological
zone
Value and Quantity of Marketed
output of food and cash crops,
livestock and fish products by
smallholders

Quarterly Reports

Evaluation Reports

Annual Reports

Mid Term Reports

Review Missions
Implementation support
Reports

TRA data.

Annual survey reports

Partnerships and platforms
with adequate capacity for
generation and uptake of
technologies and innovations
exist

Government, non-
government, regional and
national organizations
operate effectively at
appropriate levels.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

62

Verifiable Indicators
Source of Verification
Assumptions
Value of Export of non-traditional
agricultural commodities by men and
women smallholders
Established Grading and
standardization systems of
agricultural commodities
Component 4: Research for Development and Innovations

Generated and disseminated
improved land management
and gender sensitive climate
resilient agricultural practices
and technologies in targeted
areas
Hectares of land managed under
climate-resilient practices
Number of CSA technologies
developed
Increased funding in research and
development and innovations
% adoption of improved CSA
technologies and practices by men
and women along the value chain

Quarterly Reports

Publications

Mass media

Evaluation Reports

Annual survey reports

Annual Reports

Mid Term Reports

Review Missions
Implementation support
Reports

Diagnostic Survey Reports


Agricultural research in
support of CSA

Conducive policy
environment maintained
Component 5: Improving and Sustaining Agricultural Advisory Services

Knowledge on Climate Smart
Agriculture documented and
scaled up and out in targeted
areas.

Number of existing and new CSA
practices  disseminated targeted
areas
Number of Ward Resource Centres
equipped with CSA knowledge.

Quarterly Reports

Publications

Mass media

Annual survey reports.

Evaluation Reports

Annual Reports

Mid Term Reports

Government, non-
government, regional and
national organizations
operate effectively at
appropriate levels.

Conducive policy
environment maintained

Partnerships and platforms

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

63

Verifiable Indicators
Source of Verification
Assumptions

Number of demand-driven gender-
responsive CSA made available to
uptake pathways
Number of technology uptake
pathways (e.g. web-based
information platform, radio, TV
program, etc.) compared to plan.
Established robust CSA Knowledge
Management System (Platform/Hub)
across the country
Number of synthesis reports and case
studies on CSA best approaches and
guidelines prepared and
disseminated
% increase in agro-climate
information services and timely-use
of agro-weather products
Level of satisfaction of stakeholders
with the technology uptake pathways
(%)
Number of stakeholders whose
capacity building needs have been
addressed
Number of networks and stakeholder

Review Missions
Implementation support
Reports

with adequate capacity for
generation and uptake of
technologies and innovations
exist

Primary schools leavers with
CSA knowledge and practice

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

64

Verifiable Indicators
Source of Verification
Assumptions

platforms
Number of staff trained (short-term
and study tours) and applying skills
acquired in conducting CSA practices
Component 6: Improved Institutional Coordination

Coordination and management
of CSA activities and
initiatives in all implementing
agencies  enhanced
Number of Climate Change plans
developed in key sector ministries,
private sector
Percent of CSA Program activities
implemented according to plan.
Harmonized M&E system for CSA
Program developed, adopted, and
implemented according to plan (%).
Established effective  joint platform
for collaboration between ministries
responsible agriculture, livestock,
fisheries, environment, forestry,
water, finance and planning
Number of relevant policies, laws,
regulations, and/or procedures
reviewed for harmonization
Level of compliance with the
Environment and Social Safeguards.

Evaluation Reports

Annual Reports

Mid Term Reports

Review Missions
Implementation support
Reports

Quarterly Reports

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

65

Footnote:
1. The CSA-Pol reflects the most significant aspects of the enabling environment for implementing CSA at the national level.
2. The CSA-Res indicators provide an understanding about the short-term to medium-term results of a CSA intervention which may relate to food
security, poverty reduction and environmental sustainability.

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

66

Annex VIII: Budget Estimates for 2015 - 2025

Activities
Expendit
ure
Account
Unit of
measure
Yr 1 Yr 2 Yr 3
Yr 4 Yr 5 Yr 6 Yr 7 Yr 8 Yr 9
Yr
10
Unit Cost
(in US$)
Yr 1
Yr 2
Yr 3
Yr 4
Yr 5
Yr 6
Yr 7
Yr 8
Yr 9
Yr
10
Total
Rehabilitate existing warehouses and silos Works
Set
0
2
2
1
0
30,000
0
60,000
60,000 30,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
150,000
Rehabilitate, restock and build capacity of
livestock breeding centres to produce
improved breeds of livestock.
Works
Set
1
1
1
0
0
100,000
100,000
100,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
200,000
Develop agro-meteorological infrastructure
to support weather-indexed insurance
Works
Unit
0
2
2
0
0
150,000
0
300,000
300,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
600,000
Construction of water harvesting structures
at household and community levels.
Works
Unit
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
50,000
0
250,000
250,000 250,000 250,000 250,000 250,000 250,000
100,000
710,000
610,000 280,000 250,000 250,000 250,000 250,000
0
0
950,000
Procurement of  office equipment/a
Goods
Unit
24
0
12
0
0
15
50,000 1,200,000
0
600,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
1,800,000
Procurement of vehicles
Goods
Unit
10
0
0
5
0
10
50,000
500,000
0
0 250,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
750,000
1,700,000
0
600,000 250,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
2,550,000
Short term courses
Study tour
Tour
Lump sum
60
50
50
50
0
5,000
300,000
250,000
250,000 250,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
1,050,000
short-term training
Training
Lump sum
50
50
50
50
50
20
20
20
20
3,000
150,000
150,000
150,000 150,000 150,000
0
0
0
0
0
750,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
450,000
400,000
400,000 400,000 150,000
0
0
0
0
0
1,800,000
2,250,000 1,110,000 1,610,000 930,000 400,000 250,000 250,000 250,000
0
0
5,300,000
** Footnotes:
a/ Computer set= computer, printer, scanner and accessories, photocopiers, GPS
Total Cost Physical and Human Resources
BASE COSTS US$
1.1. Physical
resources
Quantities
A: Investment
1.2: Human
resources
Sub Total Civil Works
Sub Total Office Equipments
Sub Total Human Resources
1.1.2: Office
equipments
1.1.1: Civil
works
1.2.2: Trainings
and tours

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

67

4.1 Improved Productivity and Incomes
Yr 1 Yr 2 Yr 3 Yr 4 Yr 5 Yr 6 Yr 7 Yr 8 Yr 9 Yr 10
Yr 1
Yr 2
Yr 3
Yr 4
Yr 5
Yr 6
Yr 7
Yr 8
Yr 9
Yr 10
Total
Identify, upgrade, disseminate and
practice  climate smart technological
packages
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
150,000
Introduce improved crop varieties (high
yielding, early maturing, disease and
pest resistant and nutrient fortified)
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
500,000
Increase access to farm inputs
(fertilizers/pesticides/seeds/vet drugs)
and its wise application
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
300,000
Strengthen surveillance of agricultural
input trade and use
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
600,000
Identification
of
best
indigenous
knowledge
and
its
interaction
with
scientific knowledge to enhance climate
change adaptation
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
300,000
Train
farmers
on
CSA
agronomic
practices
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
400,000
Introduce improved livestock breeds
(increased productivity, disease resistant
and drought tolerant)
Service
Lumpsum
1
2
2
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
30,000
30,000
60,000
60,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
150,000
Undertake genetic characterization and
improvement of local livestock breeds
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
0
0
0
0
0
200,000
Identify, upgrade, disseminate and
practice  improved livestock technological
packages.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
120,000
Train farmers on livestock husbandry
and disease management
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
400,000
Develop and disseminate best
management practices of aquaculture
throughout the country
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
0
0
0
0
210,000
Train fisher folks in good fishing practices
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
250,000
Strengthen fish health and disease
surveillance
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
0
0
0
0
120,000
Strengthen and increase fingerlings
breeding and multiplication centers
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
160,000
Sensitize
and support private sector
involvement
in
fingerling
and
feed
production and distribution
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
200,000
Strengthen integrated fish farming (e.g. in
paddy farms)
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
200,000
Promote production and consumption of
high quality protein cereals, orange
fleshed sweet potatoes  (for vitamin A)
and leafy vegetables
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
150,000
Develop other high quality staples
through breeding – cassava, rice,
potatoes etc
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
200,000
Promote fortification of staples during
processing (micronutrient fortification and
blending products)
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
200,000
Educate
and
train
consumers
on
appropriate food combination
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
250,000
650,000
680,000
680,000
530,000
490,000
450,000
395,000
395,000
395,000
395,000
5,060,000
Unit Cost
(in US$)
Sub Total
BASE COSTS IN US$
Component
Activities
Quantities
4.1.1
Improved
productivity
and nutrition
Expenditure
Account
Unit of
measure

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

68

Promote development and diffusion of
appropriate efficient small-scale irrigation
technological packages.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
0
0
0
0
0
150,000
Train extension workers on irrigation
and water management technologies and
skills.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
350,000
Build the capacity of Irrigators
Organizations in agricultural water
management and their obligations
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
300,000
Undertake comprehensive management
needs assessment of existing large scale
irrigation schemes.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
45,000
Review of the National Irrigation Master
Plan (2002) and update irrigation
potential areas for small scale irrigation
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
35,000
35,000
35,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
70,000
Train farmers in the installation, operation
and maintenance of recommended
irrigation technologies
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
150,000
Establish links to input and output markets
and service providers (strengthen value
chain and technical backstopping).
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
60,000
Identify suitable areas for rainwater
harvesting and agricultural water
management systems.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
75,000
Train farmers/household members in
water harvesting and agricultural water
management technologies.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
0
135,000
Facilitate the construction of water
harvesting structures at household and
community levels.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
300,000
Introduce and promote in-situ rainwater
harvesting
technologies
(e.g.
Conservation agriculture)
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
45,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
450,000
295,000
295,000
260,000
200,000
200,000
170,000
170,000
170,000
170,000
155,000
2,085,000
4.1.2
Irrigation
and water
management
Sub Total

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

69

Invest in improved appropriate storage
facilities and technologies along the value
chain.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
0
0
0
0
0
200,000
Promote small scale agro-processing
industries in rural areas.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
150,000
Train producers, processers and
marketers in post-harvest management.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
150,000
Provide regular market information
(deficit/surplus areas) to improve
distribution of agricultural
commodities/food stuffs.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
150,000
Facilitate establishment of marketing
centres in rural areas with the
appropriate infrastructure.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
0
0
0
0
0
125,000
Link Region and District by feeder roads
to various marketing centres and
highways.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
0
0
0
0
120,000
Strengthen and link the smallholder
farmers to the Warehouse Receipt
System (WRS) in the grain supply chain.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
0
0
0
0
180,000
Establish Public-Private-Partnerships
management.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
0
0
0
0
150,000
Support private sector to invest in food
processing, pasture and pasture seed
production as well as value addition,
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
0
0
0
0
150,000
Facilitate linkages with relevant service
providers and markets (inputs and
outputs).
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
0
0
0
0
72,000
222,000
222,000
222,000
222,000
222,000 157,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
1,447,000
4.1.3
Improved
Food
Storage and
Distribution
Sub Total

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

70

Build capacity of nursery operators in all
crop growing areas and support them to
expand and improve quality of seedlings.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
150,000
Build capacity of Quality Declared Seed
producers and support them to expand
and improve quality of seed.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
200,000
Build capacity of food and cash crop
farmers to improve productivity and
produce quality.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
200,000
Facilitate contractual arrangements
between food and cash crop producers
and market/industry.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
0
0
0
0
150,000
Develop and promote innovative micro-
financing packages to facilitate food and
cash crop farmers to access credit.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
75,000
Rehabilitate, restock and build capacity of
livestock breeding centres to produce
improved breeds of livestock.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
0
0
0
0
120,000
Facilitate and support the acquisition of
improved breeding stocks by men and
women farmers.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
0
0
0
0
0
150,000
Provide adequate and effective
extension knowledge and agro-weather
information
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
300,000
Strengthen and/or establish efficient and
sustainable animal health and artificial
insemination services.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
350,000
Develop and support innovative micro-
financing packages to support livestock
keepers’ access to credit and markets.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
25,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
0
0
0
0
0
175,000
Identify areas with acute problem of
water for livestock and construct water
infrastructures.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
30,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
0
0
0
0
0
125,000
Facilitate improvement of demarcated
grazing lands
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
25,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
0
0
0
0
0
150,000
Promote use of crop residues and agro-
industry byproducts
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
250,000
Promote value addition for livestock
products
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
30,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
250,000
Facilitate and support acquisition of
fingerlings by men and women fish
farmers
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
25,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
0
0
0
0
0
150,000
Promote value addition for fish products
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
20,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
0
0
0
0
0
125,000
Facilitate contractual arrangements
between fish farmers and market
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
15,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
60,000
Establish and support innovative micro-
financing packages to support fisherfolks
access to credit.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
20,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
60,000
Support Local Governments to identify
and demarcate potential areas within
urban and peri-urban areas for
agricultural activities.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
30,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
80,000
Train urban and peri-urban producers in
Good Agricultural Practices.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
20,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
300,000
Monitor the safety of outputs from urban
and peri-urban agriculture.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
200,000
Enforce laws and bylaws related to
urban and peri-urban land use.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
6,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
200,000
540,000
540,000
540,000
495,000
460,000
285,000
240,000
240,000
240,000
240,000
3,820,000
1,707,000
1,737,000
1,702,000
1,447,000
1,372,000
1,062,000
850,000
850,000
850,000
835,000
12,412,000
4.1.4
Increased
Growth of
Incomes
Sub Total
TOTAL RESULT AREA 1 : IMPROVED PRODUCTIVITY AND INCOMES

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

71

4.2. Building resilience and associated mitigation co-benefits
Yr 1 Yr 2 Yr 3 Yr 4 Yr 5 Yr 6 Yr 7 Yr 8 Yr 9 Yr 10 Unit Cost
(in US$)
Yr 1
Yr 2
Yr 3
Yr 4
Yr 5
Yr 6
Yr 7
Yr 8
Yr 9
Yr 10
Promote integrated soil fertility and water
management interventions.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
100,000
Establish CSA/SLM knowledge hubs across
the country to support adoption of CSA and
SLM technologies and practices by men
and women that improve soil health and
restore degraded lands.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
25,000
25,000
25,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
50,000
Enhance the capacities of private sector
service providers and farmer-based
organizations to support farmers’ adoption of
existing/new/improved CSA and SLM
technologies and practices.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
60,000
Develop and integrate CSA and SLM
principles into farmer-field schools, primary,
secondary and tertiary curriculum.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
0
0
0
0
0
100,000
Establish mechanisms for joint planning and
implementation of CSA and SLM at the local
level.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
30,000
Develop and implement sustained
awareness creation program on CSA and
SLM in addressing soil health and land
degradation challenges.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
75,000
Facilitate the development and
implementation of at least five (5) small scale
CSA Projects annually.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
250,000
Facilitate the dissemination and adoption of
CSA and SLM technologies and practices at
the farm level across the country through
Local Government’s CSA Projects.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
100,000
100,000
100,000
100,000 100,000 100,000 100,000 100,000 100,000 100,000 100,000 1,000,000
Establish CSA/SLM Knowledge Platform
with disaggregated data on men and
women.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
25,000
25,000
25,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
50,000
Document and publicize successful
CSA/SLM technologies, practices and
interventions
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
0
0
0
0
0
50,000
270,000
270,000
220,000 165,000 165,000 135,000 135,000 135,000 135,000 135,000 1,765,000
Total
BASE COSTS IN US$
Component
Activities
Unit of
measure
Expenditure
Account
Quantities
Sub Total
2.1 Improve soil
health and restore
degraded lands

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

72

Upscale Natural Forest Conservation
through Participatory Forest  Management
(PFM)
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
180,000
Protect water catchment areas through
integrated watershed management.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
100,000
Increase forest cover through natural
regeneration, Agroforestry, Reforestation.
and Afforestation
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
200,000
Promote best management practices for
natural resources management to improve
and maximize net benefits for the farmers
and other downstream users (e.g. power
generation and urban water supply).
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
150,000
Promote and support on farm soil
conservation activities
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
150,000
Promote sustainable production and
marketing of charcoal from miombo
woodlands
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
13,000
13,000
13,000
13,000
13,000
13,000
13,000
13,000
13,000
13,000
13,000
130,000
Promote sustainable land use management
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
100,000
Develop a business model for ecosystem
management in order to facilitate payment
for ecosystem services (e.g. tourism
revenue used to motivate farmers to
conserve wildlife and payment for water in
urban areas used to pay farmers for
conservation of water catchments).
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
75,000
Develop and implement management plans
for ecosystems in order to encourage
sustainable use
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
0
0
0
0
0
75,000
Document biodiversity in the ecosystems
including below ground biodiversity and
develop eco-tourism opportunities in such
areas
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
0
0
0
0
0
75,000
Undertake natural resources accounting for
ecosystem services.
Service
Lumpsum
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
15,000
0
0
0
0
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
90,000
Identify agroforestry species for different
agro-ecological zones and support farmers
to increase tree cover
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
36,000
Undertake afforestation and reforestation
through Public-Private Partnerships.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
180,000
186,000
186,000
186,000 149,000 164,000 134,000 134,000 134,000 134,000 134,000 1,541,000
Sub Total
2.2 Conservation
of Natural
Resources and
Catchments

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

73

Develop and implement varied innovative
crop and livestock weather-indexed
insurance packages.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
75,000
Develop agro-meteorological infrastructure
to support weather-indexed insurance and
to use them for improved weather and
climate information services for farmers.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
45,000
Enhance the capacity of micro-finance
institutions to act as agents to deliver
innovative crop and livestock weather-
indexed insurance packages.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
75,000
Raise awareness within the insurance
industry of extreme weather and climate
risks and communicate actions and
opportunities.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
45,000
Undertake farmer education to address their
concerns regarding insurance products with
a view to gain their trust
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
150,000
Establish livestock insurance schemes and
use of insured livestock as collateral
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
300,000
Explore ways of using existing and other
safety nets such as cash transfers or
workfare programmes.
Service
Lumpsum
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
6,000
0
0
6,000
6,000
6,000
0
0
0
0
0
18,000
125,000
125,000
131,000
51,000
51,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
708,000
2.3 Insurance and
Other Safety Nets
Sub Total

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

74

Prepare vulnerability maps for targeting
food security and emergency preparedness
interventions.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
60,000
Develop tools to support vulnerable
households and communities to establish
household community systems that can
respond to emergencies (with regards to
food insecurity).
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
20,000
20,000
20,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
40,000
Monitor crops, livestock and fish pests and
diseases.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
80,000
Integrate scientific weather forecasting and
indigenous knowledge for early warning
and to inform farmer decisions.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
0
0
0
0
0
50,000
Establish a National Seed Emergency
stock.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
60,000
60,000
60,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
120,000
Improve EWS messages (clear, consistent)
that include risk information; designed to link
threat levels.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
30,000
Capacity development to farmers on early
warning systems and emergency
preparedness.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
200,000
Improve mass delivery system particularly
on content development and communication
channels.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
100,000
Establish a feedback and evaluation
process of messages delivered.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
30,000
Develop an effective frame-work for
collaboration emergency communication
centres/stakeholders.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
30,000
The explicit development of contingency
plans on district level
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
100,000
188,000
188,000
108,000
58,000
58,000
48,000
48,000
48,000
48,000
48,000
840,000
Promote adoption of low cost climate smart
technologies that minimize emission of
carbon dioxide and enhance soil carbon
t ti
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
400,000
Develop a national carbon accounting and
measurement, reporting and verification
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
460,000
829,000
829,000
705,000 463,000 478,000 402,000 402,000 402,000 402,000 402,000 5,314,000
2.4 Early Warning
System and
Emergency
Preparedness
2.5 Synergies in
adaptation and
mitigation
enhanced
Sub Total
Sub Total
TOTAL RESULT AREA 2 : BUILDING RESILIENCE AND ASSOCIATED MITIGATION CO-BENEFITS

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

75

Yr 1
Yr 2 Yr 3 Yr 4 Yr 5
Yr 6
Yr 7
Yr 8
Yr 9
Yr 10
Yr 1
Yr 2
Yr 3
Yr 4
Yr 5
Yr 6
Yr 7
Yr 8
Yr 9
Yr 10
Solicit funds for research and innovation into
agricultural value chains
service
Lumpsum
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Develop improved infrastructure for
agricultural value chains.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000
0
0
0
0
0
50,000
Institute competitive grant scheme for
agriculture value chains.
Service
Lumpsum
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Identify existing value addition technologies
and incentivize the private sector to promote
them.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
16,000
16,000
16,000
16,000
16,000
16,000
0
0
0
0
0
80,000
Establish regional hubs (a cluster of livelihood
zones in the same AEZ) for value chain
development and backstopping.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
45,000
Identify and build capacity of actors in value
chain processes.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000 18,000 18,000 18,000 18,000
180,000
Undertake advanced market feasibility studies
to promote demand for the selected
commodities.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
75,000
Facilitate linkages to markets for the selected
commodities.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
16,000
16,000
16,000
16,000
16,000
16,000
0
0
0
0
0
80,000
100,000 100,000 100,000 60,000
60,000
18,000 18,000 18,000 18,000 18,000
510,000
Unit of
measure
Expenditure
Account
Total
Unit Cost
(in US$)
BASE COSTS IN US$
4.3.1
Development
of new
agricultural
products
Component
Activities
Quantities
Sub Total
3. Value Chain Integration

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

76

Create agricultural, livestock and fish
commodity hubs through participation of
private sector especially micro-financiers and
apply viable models of linkage with
smallholders
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
16,000
16,000
16,000
16,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
48,000
Facilitate capacity building of farmers on
demand- and market-driven production.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
80,000
Design and launch a market promotion
program for import substitution commodities.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12,000
12,000
12,000
12,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
36,000
Work with supermarkets, hotels and
restaurants to participate in selected
commodity value chains with a smallholder
production base.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000
80,000
Identify successful lead private sector firms
with access to assured markets and apply
viable models of linkage with smallholders.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5,000
5,000
5,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10,000
Design sustainable programmes to support
the certification of smallholders for export
markets.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10,000
10,000
10,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
20,000
Develop branding of Tanzania produce for
regional and international markets.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
20,000
20,000
20,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
40,000
Develop grading and standardization
systems for agricultural commodities that do
not have grades and standards
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
26,000
26,000
26,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
52,000
Promote the adoption of grading and
standardization systems for all agricultural
commodities for both domestic and export
markets.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000 40,000 40,000 40,000 40,000
400,000
145,000 145,000
84,000
56,000
56,000 56,000 56,000 56,000 56,000 56,000
766,000
245,000 245,000 184,000 116,000 116,000 74,000 74,000 74,000 74,000 74,000 1,276,000
Sub Total
TOTAL RESULT AREA 3 : VALUE CHAIN INTEGRATION
4.3.2 Increased
competitivenes
s and
enhanced
integration into
domestic,
regional and
international
markets

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

77

Yr 1 Yr 2 Yr 3 Yr 4 Yr 5 Yr 6 Yr 7 Yr 8 Yr 9 Yr 10
Yr 1
Yr 2
Yr 3
Yr 4
Yr 5
Yr 6
Yr 7
Yr 8
Yr 9
Yr 10
Increase public expenditure into research and
development and innovations through national
budget.
service
Lumpsum
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Incentivize private sector investments in
research and development and innovations.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
105,000
Conduct participatory research work on
improved technologies and practices that is
informed by needs of users and agro-
ecological zones along the value chain.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
55,000
55,000
55,000
55,000
55,000
55,000
55,000
0
0
0
0
330,000
Conduct on-farm research into low-cost
appropriate technologies and practices and
deliver them as packages.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
0
0
0
0
360,000
Build the capacity of extension, producers and
other stakeholders in the use of
existing/new/improved CSA technologies and
practices.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
600,000
Support development of private sector input
and appropriate CSA technologies outreach
and distribution networks.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
54,000
54,000
54,000
54,000
54,000
54,000
0
0
0
0
0
270,000
Intensify field demonstration/field days/study
tours to enhance adoption of
existing/new/improved CSA technologies and
practices.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
400,000
304,000 304,000
304,000
269,000 269,000 215,000 100,000 100,000 100,000 100,000 2,065,000
Establish a platform through which researchers
will have regular contacts with stakeholders
and other users at the national, local and farm
levels.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
30,000
30,000
30,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
60,000
Prepare CSA information packages and
disseminate them to interested stakeholders
using ICT.
Service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
350,000
65,000
65,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
410,000
369,000 369,000
339,000 304,000 304,000 250,000 135,000 135,000 135,000 135,000 2,475,000
Total
Unit Cost
(in US$)
4: Research for Development and Innovations
Sub Total
TOTAL RESULT AREA 4 : RESEARCH FOR DEVELOPMENT AND INNOVATIONS
4.1
Agricultural
research funding
and Uptake of
Agricultural
Technologies and
Innovations along
the Value Chain
4.2
Research
Extension
Linkage
strengthened and
made functional
by 2018
Expendit
ure
Account
Unit of
measure
BASE COSTS IN US$
Quantities
Component
Activities
Sub Total

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

78

Yr 1 Yr 2 Yr 3 Yr 4 Yr 5 Yr 6 Yr 7 Yr 8 Yr 9 Yr 10
Yr 1
Yr 2
Yr 3
Yr 4
Yr 5
Yr 6
Yr 7
Yr 8
Yr 9
Yr 10
Undertake a CSA knowledge mapping, audit
and analysis.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
75,000
Equip Ward Resource Centres with CSA
knowledge.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
150,000
Develop and maintain a robust and functional
CSA knowledge management system.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
250,000
Build capacity to different stakeholders in the
agricultural value chain at the national and
local levels.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
500,000
Undertake analyses and provide tools to
support CSA decision-making.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
25,000
25,000
25,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
50,000
Bundle and provide synthesized information
on CSA approaches and case studies on CSA
best approaches.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
300,000
Develop and test CSA guidelines and decision-
making support tools.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
40,000
40,000
40,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
80,000
Produce regular CSA information and
communication materials for influential
stakeholders to support and inform policies,
planning and agricultural advisory services.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
350,000
Produce CSA information and communication
materials to strengthen capacity of
researchers, private sector, CSOs and farmer
organizations to influence policy and decision
makers.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
0
0
0
0
180,000
Develop practical and applied training
materials and packages for training on CSA.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
40,000
40,000
40,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
80,000
Strengthen CSA knowledge and information
sharing networks/forums.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
350,000
Develop a portfolio of information sharing
technology tools to support sharing of CSA
information and learning resources.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
33,000
33,000
33,000
33,000
33,000
33,000
33,000
33,000
33,000
33,000
33,000
330,000
Establish CSA knowledge partnerships on
knowledge generation, sharing and
mobilization with governments, international
organizations, research institutions, farmer
organizations, private sector and civil society
organizations.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
300,000
Strengthen curriculum and put emphasis on
practical experience.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
105,000
Sub total
138,000
173,000
133,000
133,000
98,000
98,000
98,000
98,000
98,000
98,000
1,165,000
BASE COSTS IN US$
Unit Cost
(in US$)
Component
Activities
Quantities
4.5.1 CSA
knowledge
generation
and
dissemination
5: CSA Knowledge, Extension and Agro-weather Services
Total
Unit of
measure
Expenditure
Account

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

79

Identify appropriate climate/weather services
and products for small scale farmers
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
0
0
0
0
0
125,000
Promote integrated weather observation for
improving availability and reliability of climate
information.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
500,000
Digitize historical climate data to enhance
availability and accessibility of climate
information.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
0
0
0
0
0
175,000
Downscaling forecasted weather to various
localities to promote the appropriate
climate/weather services and products for
small scale farmers, and pre-season
dissemination of agro weather advisories
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
45,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
180,000
Promote in-season community agro-weather
monitoring and post-season agro-weather
review
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
300,000
Improve dissemination channels of climate
information (e.g. use of mobile phone based
early warning system).
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
300,000
Generate user friendly and tailor made
products for improving smallholder farmers
‘decision making.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
350,000
Strengthen integration of climate research with
agricultural research
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
0
0
0
0
0
175,000
Training of Regional Coordinators on CSA.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
0
0
0
280,000
325,000
325,000
325,000
325,000
280,000
185,000
185,000
145,000
145,000
145,000
2,385,000
463,000
498,000
458,000
458,000
378,000
283,000
283,000
243,000
243,000
243,000 3,550,000
Sub Total
TOTAL RESULT AREA 5 : CSA KNOWLEDGE, EXTENSION AND AGRO-WEATHER SERVICES
4.5.2 Enhance
extension,
climate
information
services and
agro- weather
advisories

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

80

Yr 1 Yr 2 Yr 3 Yr 4 Yr 5 Yr 6 Yr 7 Yr 8 Yr 9 Yr 10
Yr 1
Yr 2
Yr 3
Yr 4
Yr 5
Yr 6
Yr 7
Yr 8
Yr 9
Yr 10
Develop and implement an inter-
ministerial communications strategy with
respect to inter-ministerial coordination
on matters relating to climate smart
agriculture.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
40,000
40,000
40,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
80,000
Introduce a biannual joint planning and
review session between inter-ministerial
team and the country government
officials responsible for agriculture.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
150,000
Train national, regional  and local
government staff in cross-sectoral
planning and implementation.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
300,000
Build policy review and analytical
capacity at the national and local levels.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
150,000
Strengthen the planning,
implementation, monitoring and
evaluation at the national and local
levels.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
200,000
Establish a framework for disseminating
CSA programmatic planning and
implementation as well as annual
reports and studies and receiving
feedback at national and local levels.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
75,000
245,000 245,000 205,000 130,000 130,000 130,000 130,000 130,000 130,000 130,000
955,000
Total
6: Improved Institutional Coordination
Expenditure
Account
Unit of
measure
Unit Cost
(in US$)
BASE COSTS IN US$
4.6.1 Improve
Inter-Ministerial
and Local
Government
Coordination
Component
Activities
Quantities
Sub Total

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

81

Engage private sector to identify
opportunities for increased investments
in CSA.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
100,000
Organize regular  consultative
meetings with private sector and CSOs
on the planning and implementation of
the CSA Program.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
150,000
Identify appropriate incentives to
catalyze private sector and CSO
investments in CSA activities.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
90,000
Publicize the Country CSA Program to
private sector and CSOs with a view to
identifying areas for their participation.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
33,000
33,000
33,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
66,000
Establish communication channels for
consultations between private sector
and CSOs in the programmatic planning
and implementation of CSA activities at
the national and local levels.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
45,000
45,000
45,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
90,000
163,000 163,000 85,000
55,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
496,000
Harmonize
GoT
and
development
partners’ investments in climate smart
agriculture through a common Country
(National) CSA Program.
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
36,000
36,000
36,000
36,000
36,000
36,000
0
0
0
0
0
180,000
Strengthen collaboration between GoT
and
the
Development
Partners’
Agriculture Coordination Group (with a
standing agenda item programmatic
planning and implementation of CSA
Program).
service
Lumpsum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
200,000
76,000
76,000
76,000
76,000
76,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
380,000
484,000 484,000 366,000 261,000 236,000 200,000 200,000 200,000 200,000 200,000 1,831,000
Sub Total
6.3
Programmatic
Coordination
with
Development
Partners
strengthened
TOTAL RESULT AREA 6 : IMPROVED INSTITUTIONAL COORDINATION
4.6.2 Partnerships
with private sector
and civil society
organizations
Sub Total

Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Program 2015 - 2025

82

Yr 1
Yr 2
Yr 3
Yr 4
Yr 5
Yr 6
Yr 7
Yr 8
Yr 9
Yr 10
Total
A: Investment
2,250,000
1,110,000
1,610,000
930,000
400,000
250,000
250,000
250,000
0
0
5,300,000
B: Components
1.1  Improved productivity and nutrition
650,000
680,000
680,000
530,000
490,000
450,000
395,000
395,000
395,000
395,000
5,060,000
1.2  Irrigation and water management
295,000
295,000
260,000
200,000
200,000
170,000
170,000
170,000
170,000
155,000
2,085,000
1.3  Improved Food Storage and Distribution
222,000
222,000
222,000
222,000
222,000
157,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
1,447,000
1.4  Increased Growth of Incomes
540,000
540,000
540,000
495,000
460,000
285,000
240,000
240,000
240,000
240,000
3,820,000
2.1 Improve soil health and restore degraded
lands
270,000
270,000
220,000
165,000
165,000
135,000
135,000
135,000
135,000
135,000
1,765,000
2.2 Conservation of Natural Resources and
Catchments
186,000
186,000
186,000
149,000
164,000
134,000
134,000
134,000
134,000
134,000
1,541,000
2.3 Insurance and Other Safety Nets
125,000
125,000
131,000
51,000
51,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
45,000
708,000
2.4 Early Warning System and Emergency
Preparedness
188,000
188,000
108,000
58,000
58,000
48,000
48,000
48,000
48,000
48,000
840,000
2.5 Synergies in adaptation and mitigation
enhanced
60,000
60,000
60,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
460,000
3.1 Development of new agricultural products
100,000
100,000
100,000
60,000
60,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
510,000
3.2 Increased competitiveness and enhanced
integration into domestic, regional and
international markets
145,000
145,000
84,000
56,000
56,000
56,000
56,000
56,000
56,000
56,000
766,000
4.1 Agricultural research funding and Uptake of
Agricultural Technologies and Innovations along
the Value Chain
304,000
304,000
304,000
269,000
269,000
215,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
2,065,000
4.2 Research Extension Linkage strengthened
and made functional by 2018
65,000
65,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
410,000
5.1 CSA knowledge generation and
dissemination
138,000
173,000
133,000
133,000
98,000
98,000
98,000
98,000
98,000
98,000
1,165,000
5.2 Enhance extension, climate information
services and agro- weather advisories
325,000
325,000
325,000
325,000
280,000
185,000
185,000
145,000
145,000
145,000
2,385,000
6.1 Improve Inter-Ministerial and Local
Government Coordination
245,000
245,000
205,000
130,000
130,000
130,000
130,000
130,000
130,000
130,000
955,000
6.2 Partnerships with private sector and civil
society organizations
163,000
163,000
85,000
55,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
496,000
6.3 Programmatic Coordination with
Development Partners strengthened
76,000
76,000
76,000
76,000
76,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
380,000
GRAND TOTAL
6,347,000
5,272,000
5,364,000
3,979,000
3,284,000
2,521,000
2,194,000
2,154,000
1,904,000
1,889,000
32,158,000
BASE COSTS IN US$
Summary Cost by Component
